 Qilpin County, Chronicle RUSSELL PORTER Originally written for a concert drama performance in Central City, Gilpin County, Colorado, on the occasion of Colorado Day, August 1, 1957. Russell Porter is Professor of Radio-Television, The University of Denver. THE PROLOGUE: THE VOICES: THE BOY: Less than a hundred years have tumbled down The riverbeds of time since pioneers Built on this spot, beneath these peaks, this town And bet their lives against the coming years. Here where the creek and gulches meet they came With picks and pans and shovels, wagons, wives, To search the shining mountains; and their names Are largely lost, as were their fortunes, lives. Submerged beneath the grandeur of the few Whose names now fill the books, stand carved in stone, Are those who, living, no one ever knew, And dying, filled forgotten graves, unknown. But these the dead, like lost and scattered ashes That mark the moments of extinguished fires Are those who tore the sod, who left the gashes In granite cliffs, who built these towers and spires. No giants these, no peaks that tear the sky. These are the dust, the pebbles, grains of sand. Priceless and petty, numberless they lie. They are the very earth. They are this land. On this the day when ancient deeds are sung They too would speak, they too would tell their story; Listen, from nameless graves each ghostlike tongue Whispers its tale of thin, pathetic glory. Listen, the grains of dust will tell their story. You have heard our song in the silver sighing Of aspen leaves; in the wild geese crying; In water, in wind, in the liquid whistle Of mountain birds; from the sharp-tongued thistle. You have heard our voices, grave and gay; You have never asked what we had to say- The searchers, the seekers, the weak, the brave- Has anyone ever found my grave? I knew, deep in my bones, I would find the gold For I went, not for myself9 but for others. 27  28 THE ILIFF REVIEW When my father froze to death In an Iowa blizzard, Dead drunk in his wagon, Leaving me at fourteen To take care of my mother, Three brothers and two sisters, I did what I could. Hired out, Worked from morning to night. Saved a little, But none of it was enough. Then, out of the West Came the hoarse cries of men Shouting "Gold." I knelt that night in our family circle, Asking what I should do; Stay with my family, Grubbing the ground, Making do, or Leave them here Balanced on the thin edge of starvation While I searched the mountains For gold. When I rose from my knees I knew I would go to the West, Find there in the earth Comfort for my mother, Opportunity for brothers and sisters And a new life for me, Finding gold. We started too early, Our caravan. Spring storms snarled at us And we bedded more nights than not On ground as soggy as our spirits, Miserable, weary, afraid. Four men died on the way And the ten who were left Came to the Platte Hungry and sick and hopeless. AU but me. Of the ten of us, I at sixteen Was the oldest in spirit. When the others asked to turn back. I pressed us on. For I knew, I had been promised We would find gold.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 29 In Auraria the town was alive With the story Of gold in a place called Gregory's Gulch. But how could we get there, Penniless, Hungry? Where would we find the picks and the pans, The lumber for sluices, The flour, the beans and the bacon? Once more I knelt And once more rose from my knees, Went straight to the streets And before night fell Had found-had been led?- To a man who would grubstake our party. Once more, the sign. I knew we would find gold. We started one morning And for two days followed the trail Of the others, Over the peaks and down through the valleys, Coming at last to the camp. There was the smell of gold in the air. We moved through it, upward, Searching about for a place. The next day as we plodded I saw a small gulch drop down from a vast overhanging Off to the right. To the others I said "Go along, I'll explore this an hour, Then catch you." I turned up the trickle of water Working my way (Was I led?) Higher and higher Till I came to a place Where the stream broke sharp round a boulder, Ran for a moment Quiet And deep And cold. There, beneath the shadow Of the jutting rock I scooped up the sand And swirled it as I had been shown. The gravel slipped from the pan, Swirled, and slipped, and swirled Till, suddenly, mixed with the pebbles I saw it.  30 THE ILIFF REVIEW The glitter! The gold! I had found it, As I knew I would find it, The gold! Then, without warning The mountain erupted, The pan vomited gravel, The sun cascaded, The trees and the grass turning crimson. And as I fell I saw him standing behind me, The muzzle of his pistol Still smoking. I lie here now in the earth, My bones and my flesh united With the gravel, the granite, the gold. THE CHINESE: You know my name? You betcha I make mark on this small town. They bring me shirts And call me "you Chinee" And laugh And call me heathen. You do not know my name But allee same You sure remember me. One night I say my prayers As I have say them now for many years, Burning my josses When, no warning, Poof! One sudden catch The rafters of my roof And start to blaze. I run out in the street Like crazy man Hollering fire. Then everybody run And first they laugh. Then they all get afraid And ring the bells And form a line Of men with buckets Down into the draw. And then they find (An' no one laugh) No water, None at all.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 31 And then they swear And run in circles round My laundry shack. I sneak from town You bet, But as I run I look behind and see The hills on fire. Where I now lie You no one ever know And I forgot. But still I smile. I may be heathen, yes, And old Chinee. But you remember me. Remember, please, as well- And maybe frown- That prayers to Chinese god Burn up your whole damn town. THE VOICES: You have heard our song in the quiet crying Of rain in the trees; in the silver sighing Of aspen leaves; from the earnest sound Of the patient roots that stir the ground. You have heard us whisper, we who died, Swarming the slopes for gold. THE MERCHANT: I tried. I wanted the worst way To mine the gold. My journey west was more than just a lark. Fever was in my blood. The wagon trail Was one long pilgrimage, The gold, the Grail. In Denver city I needed more supplies Than I had cash, And so I hired myself for a few days To a mustached lump who ran a general store. Oh, he was nice enough as it turned out, But there he stood, Measuring cloth and spuds and lengths of wood When just beyond the hills, Beneath the ground The gold lay buried, Waiting to be found. I loaded wagons headed for the gulch With flour, lumber, beans and picks and pans, And watched them lurch away To new Jerusalem.  32 THE ILIFF REVIEW Each one I hated. Each, it seemed to me, A threat to that small square of ground Reserved for me, Uncovering the gold I should have found. Then I was sent (And still I needed cash-that's why I went) Back to St. Louis to bring a wagon train Across the plain with more supplies, Back to the general store. And when, some eight weeks later I pulled up at his door, I found my boss was dead, and, what was more Found, nice enough, he'd left it all to me. And so I waited once again Until I'd sold the stuff I'd bought. By then, no matter how I shut my eyes And cursed myself, I knew the stuff piled high in bin and shelf, With prices soaring, brought more money in Than I could walk away from, Found That money grew in more convenient places Than in streams or underground. Once more I stocked the store. I postponed for a year or two The gold. My fortune grew. Another year. Another. Then I wed. Then fathered children. On some holidays Went with the children on the narrow gauge Up to the tired out camps I never found. Then came old age- And then at last, I died. But now, long dead, My bones still ache, remembering gold and glory, While overhead The men, the many, who still bear my name, Still run their stores, Their inspiration, so they say, grandfather's story.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 33 THE WOMAN: The best time of all Is late on a summer evening. I see it now Where I lie here, High on the hill. I used to watch it From the small slab of porch John finally built to the cabin, The street, Dropping away, The long shadows of rocks, And houses, The mining towers, The mills, Stretching eastward. It is quieter now. Only the scars remain. I remember them now, My husband and my six sons Climbing the hill each evening, The sun in their faces; Three from the mines, One from the stores, Three from the mills. I remember the neighbors Climbing the hill, the sun in their faces, The day the news came From the mine. I remember the men Climbing the hill, The sun in their faces, Carrying something between them, My six sons following close, Silent. I remember the years that followed. Sons, one by one, Walking up other streets To other doors; Silent, steady, The sun in their faces As before. They are none of them known, Even now. Two of them live Here in the hills with their families. Three of them have long gone out to the prairies. One of them into the earth-Strange, it should be the youngest.  34 THE ILIFF REVIEW But all of them- I can see them each night as I lie here-All of them still With the sun in their faces, Climbing the hill. THE SOUTHERNER: I followed along With William Russell, One-third wise And two-thirds hustle, One of the hundred Men or more Blister footed And saddle sore, Who stumbled one day In sixty-nine Into Gregory's Diggins, End of the line! Two long years With shovel and pick, Diggin' and sluicin' Can make ya sick Of minin' for gold With only a flash Of yellow to turn Into ready cash, iSlavin' summers And winters holed In a chinkless cabin, Dirty and cold. Then I met Sarah, Clean as a breeze That blows in June Through the hemlock trees. Love as warm And love as snug As an open fire And a bearskin rug. Love as free As a mountain crick, Love as sweet As a "lasses" stick Back in Georgia. (Hear that song?- "Way down south Where I belong.") I got to my feet And I said, "I'm leavin', Croin' home.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 35 Now don't be grievin', It won't be long Until I've found A little patch Of Georgia ground, Land that can grow A crop at least." Then I kissed her tears And started east. Sarah I never Saw no more. I didn't count On no mangy war, Or stoppin' a ball From a Yankee gun. So I never knew About my son Till the news came driftin' In on the breeze, The talkin' tongues Of the hemlock trees Reachin' my ears With a gentle sound Where I lay deep In Georgia ground. I wonder still About that scamp, A woodscolt raised In a minin' camp, With his mama's "stay" And his daddy's "travel," A mixed up soil Of clay and gravel. Did he grow like a weed, Go rollin' round? Or a tall pine rooted Deep in the ground? Guess he stayed with his ma. Maybe found a claim. Bet he struck it rich. Bet he made a name. He's buried now As deep as me Under some pine Or hemlock tree, While time and the rain And the wind unravel The Georgia clay And the mountain gravel.  36 THE ILIFF REVIEW THE VOICES: You have heard our song in the silken sighing Of grass in the wind; in the quiet crying Of birds in the night; the hollow mutter Of wind in the pines; the sudden stutter Of distant thunder. You know our song, We, who were once here. SHE: Was it wrong? I gave them what they wanted, Kinder than were the hills To most of them who came. Cold with the wind I warmed them For a price. Wet from the freezing rain They found my arms. Hungry, I fed them. They cursed me, Called me names, Just as they cursed the hills, But crept back To us both, Panting And sighing, Desperate. Lonely. Afraid. I married one of them, One of the lonely ones, As lonely, myself, In every way as he. We got along. Who would have thought we wouldn't? He with a steady job, "No mining for a family man," he said, Too busy, both of us, for memories. I gave birth to four sons, Three of whom died, (Was it a payment on the past, I wondered?) Lived to old age Beyond my husband And was lowered to his side On this high hill, My son and grandchildren Weeping. Here, where it is quiet, There drifts in on a breeze The echo of a street,  THE ILIFF REVIEW 37 Steep and winding, Climbing a rocky hill, Blazing with lamps, Laughter too shrill. And I remember now With neither pride nor tears Those early, empty, Brash and lonely years; Remember too, with neither tears nor pride The man I found there, Loved, And lie beside. GREGORY: I knew what I was doing. By God I knew. Don't call it luck, Don't call it accident. I didn't stumble on the gold. Not me. Not John Gregory. I'd read, I'd talked, I'd tramped the mountain country, And when I found myself one early spring Deep in the gulch that later bore my name I looked around, My eyes went open And my shovel down. I knew, I knew it cold That here I'd find the gold. This was the thrill, The knowing and the finding, Not the gold. Once it was found Its yellow turned to jaundice And I sold my claim, Prospected some for pay, Then one warm day When mountain freshets had begun To run Swung westward once again, My shadow long before me In the morning sun, And westward stalking Walked my life away. Did I, I wonder, Find the gold too soon, Reaching my goal at midday With an afternoon Endless and empty Stretching out of sight? f  38 THE ILIFF REVIEW Perhaps discovery should be The final moment of a searcher's life, Under the flaming western sun And then-the night. But still I wonder As, unknown, I lie, About the others- All the ones who came To break their picks And scour thin their pans, Grow bitter, blasphemous Only at last to die Empty of hand, Empty of poke and pan, Empty of fortune, fame. Which is the best at last, I wonder still, To find the fame and feel it drain away- Or futile, frightened, reach that final hour, The final minutes, sixty seconds each, Utterly sure That all for which we've struggled, hoped and prayed Is out of reach. THE YOUNG BRIDE: Prairie smoke and columbine Set your mountain bells to ringing. Let my life be always filled With singing. Mountain torrents, mountain pools Fed by mountain snows above, I have known the warm release Of love. Mountain sun and mountain rain Caressing seeds that lie in earth, I shall know the miracle Of birth. Mountain willow, mountain pine Fill your heavy hearts with sighing, I have learned the bitterness Of dying. Sun and rain and winter snows, Seeds and flowers, mountain trees, I shall learn the quiet ways Of these. I, who lived with love and laughter From the moment of my birth Died, before I learned the patience Of the earth.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 39 THE CHORUS: You have seen our lives for a moment only Flicker like flames. You have heard our song. We, the formless, the faceless, lonely, Return to the dust where we belong. Remembering gold, remembering glory, Remember us, remember our story. EPILOGUE: This is the story that the nameless speak With tongues of resignation, hope, despair; The wise, the bold, the foolish and the weak, Their murmur lifting on the ageless air. No chieftains these, no names to conjure with, No deeds that shift the current of the stream; Their lives a distant, half-forgotten myth, Heard now as in a half-remembered dream. These are the dust, and this their gentle story; Remember them, their weakness and their worth. The great possess the pageantry and glory, The meek it is who still possess the earth! 
