cA Preface to Papera in Monor o jtartin J\iat THIS issue is presented in honor Martin Rist on the occasion of his completion of twenty-five years of service on the faculty of the Iliff School of Theology as Professor of New Testament and Christian History, Librarian, co-worker and friend. It is presented with affection and gratitude, and with the realization that in honoring our colleague it is more truly our school and its heritage which are being honored by his continuous accomplishments. The papers presented deal in part with Dr. Rist and his career and in part with his writing and scholarly contributions. In addition it will be observed that three historical studies are included, because they deal with topics in which he has had an intense interest. All of the contributors are men who have enjoyed close association with Dr. Rist, and in honoring him in this way they speak for all of us who have had that privilege. In what follows, by way of a brief sketch of his career, I have the good fortune to have at my disposal some brief autobiographical statements which Dr. Rist wrote for other occasions. His account begins: My father and mother met at Northwestern University, married following graduation, and then continued studies at Boston, he at the Boston University School of Theology and she at the New England Conservatory of Music. My father was one of the group of students who signed a petition accusing Professor G. Hinckley Mitchell of heresy because ampng other heterodoxies he taught that Moses did not write the Pentateuch. Dr. Mitchell was tried, found guilty, and dismissed. All this had a profound effect upon my father, who from this time on became a theological liberal, a view shared by my mother. Also, after this experience my father was most reluctant to sign any petition or to support any group without thorough investigation. This was the tradition in which I was brought up in the home; I was practically conceived in liberalism. Martin Rist was born in Antioch, Illinois. He lived in small towns, large towns and, for some years, in Chicago. For as a Methodist minister, his father frequently moved. He received his A.B. from Northwestern University, where he was also elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Further education was -interrupted by World War I, and he spent twenty-two months overseas. Following this he worked in factories in Indianapolis-including one position, which his students will appreciate, as an efficiency engineer-and in a real estate appraising firm in Chicago. He then returned to school, but decided in favor of theology rather than law, which had previously been his intention, and entered Garrett Biblical Institute. Unfortunately this was interrupted by serious illness, and he spent a number of years in recuperation. When he was strong enough to resume schooling, he entered Iliff, where he received the B.D. and then the Th.D. degree. Having decided to go into the teaching ministry, rather than the pastorate, he went to the University of Chicago for a Ph. D. in New Testament. Once again there was a recurrence of serious illness, a dozen operations, and a period of convalescence interrupting his studies. But finally health was restored and the degree obtained. A major factor in his persistence and success may best be stated in his own words: "Some years earlier I had met and married a western girl, a registered nurse; I am sure that her nursing knowledge and care had almost as much to do with my recovery as did the skill of the surgeons." All who know Irma Rist will heartily concur in this judgment. It is also worthy of remark that while at Chicago he had the distinction of being a Fellow in the New Testament Department. In the fall of 1936 he came to the Iliff School of Theology to teach New Testament and Church History and, in addition, to serve as librarian. As librarian he played a major part in the functional 3  4 THE ILIFF REVIEW designing of Taylor Library, and, as a result, has been consulted by many educators engaged in library planning. He has been visiting professor at the University of Chicago, the College of the Pacific, Garrett Biblical Institute, and (on numerous occasions) the University of Denver. He has been the McFadin Lecturer at Texas Christian University, and is widely known as a lecturer before church groups, seminars, and pastors' schools. As President of the Rocky Mountain Methodist Historical Society, he has made an invaluable contribution to regional historical studies and stimulated the efforts of others. He is a member of numerous learned societies and has presented a number of significant papers before their convocations. The present generation of students and those surveying Dr. Rist's extensive bibliography at the end of this journal will find it difficult to believe that he ever had any serious problem of health, for his accomplishments would do credit to the energy of three men. But friends, students and associates would be quick to add that it is not for the range and quantity of his accomplishments that we delight to honor him in this way; it is for their quality and integrity. -The Editor  M>artin PjiAt'a Prolegomena to c4pocaly,pae HAROLD R. WILLOUGHBY XN 1957 Volume XII of The Inter-preiers' Bible, the final volume of the series, was published promptly on schedule. Almost immediately the conviction became general among serious users of the volume that, preeminent among the most scholarly commentaries included in the series, was the interpretation of the Apocalypse of John by Martin Rist of Iliff. The few years that have intervened since the publication of The Interpreters' Bible, have brought full confirmation of this comparative estimate. This is not by any means the solitary judgment of the present writer. It is the general consensus of preachers and teachers and students, who have made most use of the Introduction and Exegesis by Professor Rist, and for whom, chiefly, the commentaries in this great series were written. If the truth were told, even Associate Editors of the series have autographed in personal letters substantially the same evaluation of commentator Rist's work that is here expressed. In the present year 1961, the twenty-fifth anniversary of Martin Rist's continuing service on the faculty of Iliff School of Theology, the related conviction is currently emerging that probably, among all the published writings of Professor Rist, his Introduction and Exegesis of the Johannine Apocalypse will be by far the most read and used sections of his authorship, by Biblical students in the immediate future. This possibility seems distinctly the more probable because of the firm status that The Interpreters' Bible has established for itself, as the most usable and dependable Biblical commentary produced to date on the HAROLD R. WILLOUGHBY is Professor Emeritus at the University of Chicago. He was formerly Professor of Christian Origins on the Federated Theological Faculty. The Iliff School of Theology is among the schools he has served as Visiting Professor. American side of the Atlantic Ocean. Also Rist's own growing reputation, as the outstanding American scholarly authority on the apocalyptic type of religious experience and on the apocalyptic writing of Judaism and of early Christianity particularly, seems to point in the same direction. Furthermore, we do well to keep in mind that the published interpretation is immediately to be supplemented by The Modern Readers' Guide to Revelation, also by the Iliff librarian, currently in process of production-and in paperback (New York: Reflection Books, 1961). There are yet other publications by Professor Rist that are presently available for consultation, to aid in the better understanding of his commentary on Revelation. These are a series of preliminary studies of significant and problematic aspects of the Johannine Apocalypse, written by the Iliff scholar through some thirteen years or more antecedent to the publication of his commentary. They represent, in carefully devised first-draft form, his initial and tenative conclusions regarding the several important issues involved. Since these problems concerned such matters as the structural and ideational make-up of the Johannine Apocalypse, the special meaning of distinctive terminology running all the way through it, the singular character of its world view and conception of history, and the nature of its sources, whether traditional or definitely literary; the really crucial importance of these preliminary studies can at once be appreciated. Certainly they received far less attention than they deserved to have, when they were separately published in long and scattered sequence in a scholarly journal some years ago. One of the chief purposes of the present article is to call emphatic attention once more to this series of Ristean pro-5  6 THE ILIFF REVIEW legomena to his meritorious commentary, and further to emphasize that taken together as a catena, they have meaning and importance that no one of them by itself alone can possibly possess. For the reader's convenience, then, here is the list of the series by separate titles, with each investigation bibliographically located in time and place: 1. "The Apocalyptic Pattern," The Iliff Review, Vol. I, No. 1 Winter 1944, pp. 15-21; 2. "Revelation: A Handbook for Martyrs," ibid.. Vol. II, No. 3, Fall 1945, pp. 269-280; 3. "Varieties of Historical Interpretation," ibid.. Vol. VII, No. 3, Fall 1950, pp. 98-105; 4. "The Common Source of Revelation 16:17-22:5 and the Apocalypse of Elijah," ibid.. Vol XII, No. 1, Winter 1955, pp. 27-34. It does not need to be specially noted that it is most happy and appropriate and convenient that all these preliminary investigations found publication in the well - reputed Iliff Review, to which Martin Rist and his Denver Colleagues have contributed so challengingly and in such forward-looking fashion through nearly two decades. Moreover, one who is familiar with the intellectual habits of the inquisitive Rist will quickly recognize that the pre-publication of exploratory statements prior to definitive affirmations on problematic issues is most typical of this factual-minded author. Repeatedly during his graduate student days he had this serious injunction dinned into his heedful ears by his great master, Edgar Johnson Goodspeed: "Gentlemen, when you become educators, do not neglect to make your own students personal sharers with yourself in your own researches!" The Ristean habit of tentative, trial prepublication-one is gratified to observe-continues to be one of the ways in which this Iliff pedagogue puts this Goodspeed injunction into active practice, with his own colleagues and students today. Thus most concretely he invites their participation in the solution of problems on which he is himself alertly engaged at the time. Having indulged in this much of explanation for the series of prolegomena to the commentary on Revelation, it is high time that we should immediately turn to a resume of one of the preliminary essays in the series itself. If this summary abridgement of what was originally a prolegomenon is truly and well rendered, it should demonstrate, or at least illustrate, the peculiar worth of these antecedent studies in making plainer and more intellegible the ultimate positions taken by the interpreter in his Introduction and Exegesis. It is almost inevitable that we choose for such abridged rendering the very first essay in the series, the one entitled "The Apocalyptic Pattern," which was published in the very first number of the first volume of The Iliff Review itself (Vol. I, No. 1, Winter 1944, pp. 15-21). Thus both in meaning and in purpose the paraphrase is accorded the introductory character that Professor Rist himself intended for this initial essay when he wrote it. Face to face with the proposition of composing a commentary on the Apocalypse, of John, the author formulated at the very outset these initial, searching questions: "What is an apocalypse; what are its distinguishing characteristics?" In the earnest endeavor to provide the answer to his own interrogations, he wrote his essay entitled "The Apocalyptic Pattern." The questions seemed to call at once for a comprehensive survey of the numerous ancient writings, most familiarly Jewish and Christian, popularly and generally classed as "Apocalypses" and usually accepted as such; and for an analysis of them as to content and literary form. To his dismay and confusion, librarian Rist found that this unitary, classifying category was applied very indiscriminately to writings of the most diverse subject matter and pattern, such as the Book of Joel in the Old Testament, and Jubilees in Intertestamental Litera- THE ILIFF REVIEW 7 ture, and the Shepherd of Hermas among the Patristics. A further survey of definitions of the term "Apocalypse" seemed indicated. This was carried out in the Iliff Library (Old Style) in the abundant reference volumes there available. The results were quite as disillusioning. The definitions encountered varied as extensively as did the contents of the alleged "Apocalypses" themselves. What the author was in search of- though his consciousness of it was none too clear at the time-was a distinctive overall ideological schema, framed in a realistic world view and including a definite diagram of history, so presented as to accentuate the obligations and expectations of religious people at a particularly critical juncture in human experience. That was a rather large and complicated order to expect fulfillment on. Nevertheless, within the turn of several centuries from times B. C. to times A. D. he found a considerable nucleus of resemblant writings that approximated the specifications, most numerously among late Jewish and early Christian books. Classics among them were the canonical books of Daniel and Revelation in the Old and New Testaments and the Enochian strata among the inter-Biblical writings. With time and recognition he came to include certain earlier and later gentile compositions as well. With unnecessary apologies for clumsiness, here is Rist's own narrative description of "The Apocalyptic Pattern" as he summarized it in Vol. I, No. 1, of the Iliff Review: "Apocalypticism is the eschatological belief that the present evil and corrupt world, now under the control of Satan, will soon be ended and destroyed along with Satan and his demonic and human agents, by the direct intervention of God, heretofore transcendent; who thereupon will establish a new and perfect age and a new and perfect world, both under his immediate control, in which the righteous from among the living and the resurrected dead will enjoy a blessed, righteous existence without end." Having summarised the distinguishing characterizations of apocalyptic writing, the author at once turned to the inviting task of analyzing and evaluating the important factors and elements involved. First of all he stressed that apocalyptic concern was primarily focused on matters eschatological. Aiming at a literal rendition of the Greek term eschaton, he became an extremist and a rigorist in his understanding of the word. It had to do with last things, rather than with first things; with ends rather than with beginnings; with death rather than with life and its cognates. It was concerned with the uttermost and the outside matters in the bad direction, rather than with the opposite and in the good direction. In his judgment, apocalypse was so typically and dominantly eschatological, that all non-eschatological writings should be debarred from this classification. On these grounds he would rule out therefrom much Old Testament prophecy and the derived teaching about the Kingdom of God, as "concerned with this life and not the next, with this present age and not the future." So indispensable to his apocalypse pattern did Martin Rist consider the eschatological factors to be, that he was willing to assert that apocalypticism was always eschatological, though he could not and did not affirm the reverse to be the case. In the next place he was equally willing to affirm that apocalyptic was invariably dualistic. This was not a spirit-matter dualism of soul and flesh, such as Gnostic and Orphic groups cultivated. Rather it was a supernaturalistic dualism of controlling powers and forces conceived at once in cosmic and personal ways, and rated as good and bad respectively. God was at the head of the forces of good and righteousness; as Satan or his equivalent was at the head of the demonic hosts of evil. Rist noted with apparent satisfaction that the cosmic dualism of apocalyptic writings was less  8 THE ILIFF REVIEW closely and evenly balanced than was the Persian scheme that had preceded it. Satan accordingly was more definitely inferior in power and lasting qualities to the God of Jews and Christians, than the despicable Ahriman had been in relation to the shining and admirable Ormazd. In the apocalyptic ordering of things moral and ethical demands and associations were not indeed neglected or ignored, nor were they particularly emphasized, for that matter. Rather the response expected from the righteous loyalist was personal fidelity and loyalty to the power that was, expressed mainly in cultic conformity to his worship, and in the avoidance of the idolatrous practices of heathenism, which were palpably Satanic. With cosmic and supernaturalistic dualism in control and conditioning all things, it was inevitable that human ideas of time and of the circumstances and conditions of existence should be conceived and represented correspondingly. Hence the author was not surprised to observe that, in the apocalyptic scheme, all time and all existence was thought of inclusively in terms of two contrasting aeons: the present age or current period of existence, and in antithesis to this, the age to come in the impending future. The character of each age was thought to correspond exactly, bad or good, to the traits of the supernatural power in control at the time. As to the present age the consensus was that things were bad, indeed very bad. Accordingly Satan, the power of evil, was believed to be in control; and God was thought to be transcendent, far removed from the world of men, gloriously enthroned in highest heaven. Then, by antithetical contrast, would come the age of the future. God would get complete control of affairs. He would eradicate Satan and all his minions, and establish a new age and a new order of existence and society, entirely different from all that had been before. This would be a supremely good and an everlasting time. All these imaginary anticipations Rist found crammed into the conflate two-age mythology of the apo-calyptists. One surely cannot deny the utter seriousness and urgency of the religious difficulties that impelled to this formulation of the double two-age and two-world mythologies of apocalyptic seers. On the one side there was the problem of the origins of evil, or rather of the endless varieties of concrete evils to which humankind was constantly subjected. On the other side was the colossal problem of how most effectively evils could be nullified en toto for the benefit and glorification of humankind. Characteristically apocalyptists were sure that present evils were so multiplied and exaggerated that they were quite beyond the capacities of mere humans to cope with. Under such circumstances the only thing that could be done was throw oneself over with abandon to faith only, and in complete dependence on the power and goodness of God alone, await with patience and confidence his determination to intervene, and act, and straighten everything out. One can be very sure that a serious religionist like Dr. Rist, who has invested a twenty-five-year-long professional lifetime making his own best contribution to untangle such a nexus of difficulties as this, is the last person around to look down his nose, with ungenerous contempt, for the loyal but wishful thinking of apocalyptists, be they ancient or modern. Thus far we have underscored the primary importance of eschatological factors and of dualism in the inclusive scheme of apocalypticism. This was the main predilection of Rist himself in the first half of his prolegomenon on the distinguishing characteristics of an apocalypse. To him these elements were so important that he valued them as essentials, no less. By the time he came to write his Introduction to the Exegesis of Revelation he was prepared to add a third primary factor, fully coordinate with these first two features. This was determinism. The choice was truly made. It is difficult indeed to conceive a com- THE ILIFF REVIEW 9 position more deterministic in character than the Johannine Apocalypse. The God of Revelation was completely and fully an autocrat. All that had happened in his cosmos, had occurred as he had willed it to be. The main periods of time specified: the Present Evil Age, the Millennium, the Gog-Magog Era, and the Eternal Age to Come, were so definitely determined that the author could diagram them and date them in terms of A. D. chronology! The numbers of righteous people designated for salvation were specified, as were also the numbers already counted out for martyrdom. Even the measurements of the New Jerusalem yet to be were exactly recored. Really, one must indicate regret that Martin Rist did not write a paragraph on determinism in his initial essay on "The Apocayptic Pattern!" Having placed primary stress on eschatological and dualistic concepts in analyzing the apocalytic plan, the Iliff essayist turned next, in his prolegomenon, to a consideration of secondary and more formal elements involved such as purported visions or the pretense of pseudonymity. Here was a curious circumstance. In general estimation, these formal literary arrangements were more frequently than not considered to be indicative and important. As the word apocalypse itself suggests, both anciently and recently a vision was estimated to be the appropriate manner in which to transmit the religious teachings to be disclosed in writings of this kind. Martin Rist, to the contrary, regarded visions as a secondary and less important characteristic of apocalypses. He was quite prepared to cite major examples of apocalyptic writing that made no use of the vision expedient. The seventh book of Lactantius' "Divine Institutes" was a favorite instance with him. Also he recognized the familiar and misleading habit of labelling a book as an apocalypse because of the visions it included. The visions of Ezechiel were extended examples in point. Moreover, as the Exegesis of Revelation amply demonstrated, he had plenty of good psychological and literary reasons for questioning the actuality of many of the visions and vision sequences there delineated. The Iliff investigator found that much the same situation was the case with the literary practice of pseudonymity. Very many ancient apocalypses were self-alleged to have been composed by some more ancient seer or prophet or patriarch, other than the real author himself. In the corpus of writings entitled "Pseude-pigrapha" by R. H. Charles, approximately one half of the total number of books included were also classed as "Apocalypses" by the eminent editor. Yet again Rist had no difficutly in citing outstanding examples to the contrary; and once again Lactantius of the "Divine Institutes" was a favorite witness. In clear cases of pseudonymity, it was quite patent that the literary device served well the practical purpose of attributing to the apocalyptic subject-matter an authority and influence that otherwise it might not have had. Admittedly pseudonymity was a tricky device to manipulate. There are cases aplenty where one just cannot be quite sure whether or not this is the real explanation. The Apocalypse of John is usually and probably rightly accepted as genuinely the work of John of Patmos. Yet one cannot be indubitably certain of this. In any case, Rist was right in rating pseudonymity as a minor, rather than as an indispensable feature of the apocalyptic pattern. Messianismi was yet another factor, usually reckoned as very important and considerable, that the prolegomenon author found it necessary to cut down to size. To be sure, the towering figure of Christ was the eponym and the certain identification of Christian apocalypses. But this was not the case in Jewish books. There the Messiah and his role were less frequent and less prominent than is usually presumed. Sometimes, in one and the same work, now he was active there, and once again he was not there at all. II Baruch presented contrary arrangements in conjunction. One chief source portrayed  10 THE ILIFF REVIEW the Messiah in action. Another source left him out of it altogether. Professor* Rist remarked dryly of the contrast: "This antithesis did not disturb the author, but it serves to make II Baruch difficult reading (today)!" When the investigation got on to Neo-Hebraic examples, the researcher found two Messiahs operative, as we have seen to be the case in the Qumran literature. On the other hand, several very familiar instances of Jewish Apocalypses could be cited where the Messiah was missing altogether. With the Messiah was associated the chronological conception of the Millennium or 1,000 years when Christ and his martyrs would reign-so Christians phrased it. The exact length or shortness of the period, and its presence of absence from the plan, were varying phenomena. The term "millennialism" gives a too definite, an exaggerated, and a misleading impression of this feature. Also associated with the Messiah was the Anti-Messiah, the anti-Christ of Christian compositions, a very disagreeable personage indeed! He was the antitype, the completely irreconcilable opponent of the cosmic savior. Ill imagination and perverse fantasy were unrestrained when it came to caricaturing him. Gog and Magog were a malignant pair of doubles of him whom Rist found destructively in action at the very end of the old, Satanic order of things in Revelation. He recognized in them a duplication of the traditional Gog from the land of Magog, lately emergent from Ezekiel 38-39. To his credit be it noted that he paid the very least attention to them in his discussion of the "Apocalyptic Pattern." They were the last and the least of evil incidents, quite unessential to the full plan of Revelation. It goes without saying that there were plenty of other secondary and realistic details that Martin Rist simply ignored and left unconsidered in his preliminary essay; mainly because they were relatively unimportant and in fact were non-contributory to the wholeness of the apocalyptic construct. These decidedly minor matters included such features as angelology and demonology, animal symbolism and monstrous fantasies, astrology and numerology, stereotyped listings of Messianic woes and final rewards, judgment scenes and agonizing punishments, etc., etc., etc. In fact the chief service rendered by this first prolegomenon was not in a careful re-presentation of apocalyptic spectacles-quantitatively overwhelming as such a massing of data might have been-but instead in the thoughtful differentiation between what was necessary and what was non-necessary to the total plan, and in the clear accentuation on what was primary, with corresponding devaluation of what was relatively secondary and definitely non-essential. In rendering thoughtfully weighted estimates of this kind, the author was very helpful and most effective. Now, at last, a summary postscript is required. The main content of this article has been a resume of the Rist essay on "The Apocalyptic Pattern." If readers have found that to be of interest in giving them a vivid and realistic impression of how a thorough scholar goes about preparing to undertake a huge and supremely difficult piece of research, then it is appropriate to remind them again that other essays are waiting their attention it relation to yet other equally important themes. These are the prolegomena that historian Rist published on Martyrology and Historical Interpretation and Sources Traditional and Literary-each in relation to apocalyptic-in later numbers of The Iliff Review, and in the following very even sequence: Vol. II, No. 3 (1945); Vol. VII, No. 3 (1950); Vol. XII, No. 1 (1955). These studies have continuing value today. Merited attention should be given to them at the present time. They remain and continue to be essential sections of the whole process that was summarized in finished fashion in Martin Rist's unexcelled commentary on the Apocalypse of John.  Jiartin J\iat o Cuide to the ßook o/ J\evelation-G4 ßßview WALTER G. WILLIAMS IT IS altogether appropriate that Martin Rist should be selected by the Association Press to write the book interpreting The Revelation.1 For many years now, Professor Rist has been recognized as this country's outstanding authority on apocalypticism in general and the Book of the Revelation in particular. In addition to technical articles in various reference works, he has twice written a series of studies for the Methodist Church and was exegete on Revelation in the twelfth volume of The Interpreter's Bible. This new publication by Dr. Rist is an excellent demonstration of the contribution which can be made by a thoroughly trained and competent scholar who is also a devout churchman. The volume is written simply so that the layman can read and be instructed, yet behind these simple words are many years of painstaking research and investigation. There is no compromise with truth. Every statement of interpretation is under-girded with facts which can be documented and substantiated. The pastor or church teacher can place this volume in the hands of readers knowing that they will be faithfully led to new insights and appreciations for this puzzling book of The Revelation. After a brief preface in which Professor Rist sketches the persistent hold that apocalyptic thinking has had upon people across the centuries, he moves on quickly to give in a dozen pages the historical background of the biblical book. Written at the close of the first Christian century, The Revelation brought comfort and encouragement to those who were WALTER G. WILLIAMS is Professor of Old Testament Literature, The Iliff School of Theology. being persecuted for their faith. It was a handbook of faith for martyrs. "The Book of Revelation," writes Professor Rist, "is a cosmic drama of vast proportions involving the entire universe, earth, heaven, and the lower world, and all the supernatural and human life in it. The basic theme of the drama is a desperate all-out conflict between the personified forces of good and evil in the universe" (p. 27). This theme of cosmic conflict between good and evil is the basic motif in Intertestamental and New Testament apocalyptic literature. Professor Rist would claim this same characteristic for all apocalyptic literature, but this reviewer believes that Old Testament apocalyptic does not have the same dualistic view of history or of the cosmos. The cosmic drama in The Revelation is magnificently portrayed. The stage is the whole of creation. It occupies the whole of time and eternity. There are many references to historical events and to various earlier writings of the Jews. These Professor Rist aptly describes as "flashbacks." The drama is in three acts, the fiirst of which is by far the longest and depicts Satan's World Age, covering about three and half years. The second act deals with a thousand years of Christ's reign. The final act is God's World Age and though described briefly, covers eternity. The final outcome is the triumph of righteousness and the gathering in of the martyrs to a just reward. When read as cosmic drama, The Revelation loses none of its majesty, but its message gains new clarity for the modern reader. Terminology which has been used 1 Martin Rist : The Modern Reader's Guide to the Book of Revelation, New York: An Association Press Reflection Book, 1961, pp. 128, 50c. 11  12 THE ILIFF REVIEW by many Christians, ofttimes with meanings not intended by the apocalyptist, is clarified. In his introduction Professor Rist promises to explain such terms as Millenium, First Resurrection, Second Resurrection, Second Death, Babylon, Armageddon, Gog and Magog, Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, and the all important identification of the Beast whose number is 666, and many others. The promises are kept and the book does bring the clarification the reader hoped for and the identification intended by the author of the Revelation. There is no aid or comfort to those who try to superimpose upon the original writings the fantastic interpretations served up weekly by some of the sects. The author and the Association Press are to be congratulated upon a job well done and a needed service rendered.  jfyncoln and the (Republican Party, 3n Sitinola DONALD W. RIDDLE ITH the birth of the Republican party in Illinois Lincoln had nothing to do. It was organized in the spring and summer of 1854, and it held a State Convention in October of that year.1 He was pressed to join it, and its platform was kept remarkably conservative to attract him. But as he said later, "I never had anything to do with that organization."2 As late as 24 October 1855 Lincoln regarded himself as a Whig.3 But in February of 1856, when he attended the Editor's Convention in Decatur, Lincoln was committed to the new party. He had waited until it had divested itself of its earlier advanced anti-slavery position, and until its original "radicar* leaders had been replaced by moderates. And in the party itself it was his purpose to keep it conservative; this is evident in the resolutions adopted by both Decatur and the Bloomington Conventions. It is significant that the party organized-or reorganized-at Blooming-ton did not call itself "Republican." It was the "Anti-Nebraska," or the "People's Party."* It was inevitable that Lincoln should join the new party and assume a dominant role in it. He was a politician seeking office when his Whig party died. As a candidate for the Senate in 1855 he had sought Republican support,5 but had run as a Whig. To run in 1858 he must become a Republican. He merited high place in the new party. He was the oustanding Whig in Illinois. He had long been the dominant figure in the central section of the State which, by reason of its high DONALD W. RIDDLE is Professor of History and Head of the Division of Social Sciences at the Chicago Undergraduate Division of the University of Illinois. population and its heavy Whig vote, was politically decisive. The Republicans must enlist old line Whigs and Know-Noth-ings; without them, as Lincoln said, there were not enough votes to defeat the Nebraska Democracy, and they held the balance of power.6 Lincoln undertook to win them. This would have been a formidable 1 Non - partisan Anti - Nebraska meetings were held in Illinois as early as 18 March 1854 (Rock River Democrat, 21 March) and 5 April (at Freeport; Illinois State Journal, 5 April). Such meetings were recommended in Lincoln's section (Tazewell Mirror, can Journal, Illinois State Journal, 27 July). On 1 August a mass meeting in Ottawa assumed the name "Republican" (Cole, Era of the Civil War, 128). The party was organized in Kane County 19 August (Davidson and Stuve, Complete History of Illinois, 641 f.). Soon after this it was formed in Will, LaSalle, Putnam, and McLean counties (Ottawa Republican, 16 September). Republican congressional district conventions were organized: First, 30 August; Second, 30 September; Third, 21 September (Cole 130f). In elections to the State legislature the "fusion" movement was successful in thirty-two counties. For the State Convention see Transactions of the McLean Countytorical Society, 1900, 44-46; platform in Davidson and Stuve, 642f. The party stood for no extension of slavery into the territories, but there was no demand for the repeal of the fugitive slave act nor for the non-admission of more slave states. The most that was demanded was jury trial and the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus for fugitives. 2 Basier (Ed.), Collected Works, 111:113. 3CW 11:323. 4 This was the consistent practice of the Illinois State Journal, See Beveridge, Lincoln, II:369f. 5 In Lincoln's compilation of the names and party affiliation of legislators in 1855 he noted of the "fusion" members that "a great many have gone into the Republican organization." He solicited their support by correspondence. (CW 11:286-306.) °CW 11:316. 13  14 THE ILIFF REVIEW task at best. The Whigs had always been a minority in Illinois. Lincoln knew that they would be hard to manage.7 They lacked party regularity; one of them said that "whatever their conventions may resolve to do the party will do just as they please."8 They clung to their conservative "principles." They accepted slavery as an aspect of their commitment to property interests. In Northern Illinois the Kansas-Nebraska Act made Republicans and bleeding Kansas multiplied them. But the Whigs in the south and the center did not so react; they did not abandon their conservatism, and some supported the Kansas-Nebraska Act.9 The Whigs were strongly repelled by the nomination of Fremont.10 They would not become Republicans so long as that party emphasized anti-slavery. Lincoln and the other moderates had executed a notable feat of policy at the Bloomington Convention. As a bid for Whig and Know-Nothing support the platform and the candidates were conservative. Bissell, an Anti-Nebraska Democrat, was nominated for Governor. The German vote (almost unanimously Republican) was insured by the nomination of Hoffman for Lieutenant-Governor and by the adoption of a mild anti-nativist resolution. Then an old line Whig and three Know-Nothings were nominated for the remaining offices. No original Republican was placed on the ticket for any State office; by common consent the original Republicans worked in the rank and file. One of the Know-Nothings on the Republican ballot was also on the Fillmore ticket.11 These things were done because, as Lincoln saw, the nothern counties were safely Republican and the southern were safely Democratic. The central counties, where the Whig vote was strong, would be decisive.12 Here Lincoln made his greatest effort. But those Whigs could not easily be led from the party of Henry Clay. This is why the Illinois Journal avoided reference to the Republican party, always using the title, "People's Party." And when Know-Nothing and resuscitated Whig conventions nominated Fillmore, Lincoln's task become hopeless. Hence he made his major effort against Fillmore. Denying that his party was sectional, he reiterated that a vote for Fillmore was a vote for Buchanan.18 As to the effect of the Fillmore vote his logic was correct, but he failed to convince. Fremont's vote showed a gain over the vote for Scott in 1852, but Fillmore's 37,531 votes came from Whigs and Know-Nothings who refused to become Republicans. Although the Republicans won the State election it is evident that Lincoln failed to bring the Whigs into the Republican party. Thousands of them became Democrats.14 7 Whitney, Abraham Lincoln, I:260f. 8 Phillips to Bailhache and Baker, 24- July 1858, Robert Todd Lincoln Papers. 9 Davidson and Stuve, 639. Lincoln's slowness in joining the Republican party is paralleled by his belated reaction to the Nebraska Act. His first recored protest was in a speech on 26 August 1854 (CW 11:226). 10 Lincoln to Trumbull, CW II:342f. Jesse K. Dubois, even though then a Republican candidate wrote to Trumbull that "we old line Whigs belonging to the Republican ranks are not worth a curse to carry on a campaign." (17 July, 1858; Trumbull MSS, LC.) 11 Dubois accepted the Republican nomination for State Auditor, but cursed the party for its abolitionism (Davidson and Stuve, 652). The policy of nominating Democrats, Whigs, and Know-Nothings was frankly Stated in advance of the meeting of the Convention by the Chicago Tribune (ibid, 650). 12 A Democratic analysis of 1858 is to the same effect. Thomas L. Harris wrote to Douglas that "we will lose nothing in the center and the south, and of course we can win nothing in the north." Harris listed Scott, Morgan, Sangamon, Macoupin, Madison, St. Clair, Randolph, Bond, Mason, Champaign, Logan, Peoria, Woodford, Marshall, Putnam, and Coles as the pivotal counties (7 July 1858, Douglas Papers, Springfield). The sectional situation did not differ in 1856. 13 CW 11:344, 346f, 353ff, 358. His denial that the party was sectional was devastating-ly refuted in the Springfield Conservative (a Fillmore paper), 21 August 1856. 14 "It has been supposed that the whig and know-nothing parties were wholly absorbed by the republican party. Such is only partly true . . . The whigs of Sangamon, Tazewell, Morgan, and Adams largely joined the democracy, where they are to this day." (Davidson and Stuve, 654.)  THE ILIFF REVIEW 15 The statistics make plain the sectional distribution of party strength: District Region Fremont Buchanan Fillmore 1 North 18,247 5,991 677 2 North 28,556 9,943 966 3 Northwest 17,927 7,554 1,921 4 Northeast 14,918 13,044 3,726 5 West 6,373 8,808 4,854 6 Central 4,740 14,077 7,834 7 East South Central 5,199 12,382 6,078 8 Southwest 4,930 10,308 5,838 9 South 880 15,312 5,280 The Fillmore vote, an index of the northern counties, smaller in area, had success of Lincoln's appeal, was negligi- 30,028. But in 1850 these southern ble in the north, but increasingly de- counties held 92,830 people, while the cisive as the center is approached. Lin- northern held 93,477-a 34% increase coin's home county (Sagamon) voted in the south, a 211% increase in the north. Fremont 1,174, Fillmore, 1,612, Buchanan In 1840 the area of the five southern 2,475. Congressional Districts exceeded the four But Lincoln's failure implies no dis- northern in population by 176,748; their credit. No one could have succeeded. It is excess had dropped to 86,940 in 1850- probable that he brought more Whigs and the northern area had grown by 238,512 Know-Nothings into the Republican party while the central and southern had added than anyone else could have brought. 138,704. The Sangamon region and its en-And, as he viewed the result, the out- virons held the largest portion of Illinois look was hopeful.15 people in 1850, but the shift was already There was reason for Lincoln's optim- apparent, ism about IUinois. The growth of the Re- ^ **»*tv of *Ž* f\d fan^ was publican party there was assured by two ŽŽ· » was accelerated by railroad related factors which promised its suc- bu;ldmf In 18,50 ^ere wer%°niy,*00 cess in but a matter of time. That growth mlles Railroad Ž "^i? 1854 iT would have come with or without Lin- " 3'?°° milef ' By. *? Tessen ially coin. Population increase by immigration the m°d*rn ^Ž e**ted' +Largely as determined the event. The old situation a result me population distribution was as was changing. Early settlement of south- shown m tiie table on page 16 ern and central Illinois by people mostly * the m+creasef denslty °f sf lem*nt from the South accounted for the Demo- ^\ñÐo ea *? Žrants, *»? *? nyiQt. w^-i^^r ß +ie iŽ,**, *~e +i East and North greatly outnumbered cratic majority in the south and the A. . ,_ — ,, .,. . strong Whig vote in the center Later tho8e from ee South; as °PPosltlon to settlement in the north of people from slave detained party alignment the New England and the Middle States de- ^owth of the Republican party was as-surea termined the political strength of that " area.16 So soon as the less populous rrhe movement, and the related effect north and the thinly peopled east central °f railroad extension were noted when prairie province were densely settled the Lincoln and Douglas "debated" in Jones-political alignment in the State must boro> a small town in "Egypt." The cor-shift. In 1856 the change was occurring; 15 , by 1858 it was noticeable. 16This subj'ect is briefly sketched in So clear are the facts that brief statisti- Riddle, Lincoln Runs for Congress, 22-43, and cal exhibit suffices. In 1840 the popul- » f»y Presented in Boggess The Settlement *+iŽ ,iÑ oiith+aa* ,iÑ +i,e ftuMf cn^L·Ž °f Hanois, 1778-1830 and in Pooley, The Set-ation of eighteen of the oldest southern ment of I1Hnois from lg30 t0 *850> counties was 67,929. At this time eight IT Cole, 27-52.  16 THE ILIFF REVIEW Dist. Region Pop. 1850 1 North 93,477 2 North 94,508 3 Northwest 93,003 4 Northeast 101,841 5 West 93,200 6 Central 105,212 7 East South Central 83,882 8 Southwest 93,945 9 { South 92,830 respondent of the New York Evening Post made an acute observation:18 Jonesboro is a mile and a half from the railroad. The station is called "Anna," and is as large as the town itself. The Station is Republican, the town is Democratic. The land sales of the Illinois Central Railroad, by opening the country to the advent of settlers, have introduced the men of the East, who bring certain uncomfortable and antagonistic political maxims, and thus the time-honored darkness of Egypt is made to fade away before the approach of the middle state and New England ideas. Let the land sales go on and a change will take place in the political physiognomy of Southern Illinois. All things suffer a "sea of change," and already the alternative influence of the new ideas is sensibly felt in this section. Time was on the side of the Republicans, and the railroad aided time. In 1860 the four northern districts had grown by 497,206, while the five northern had a population increase of 335,130. The excess of 162,076 in the North insured a Republican majority in 1860, but the campaign of 1858 was made while the parties were in an almost even balance in the State. In the extraordinarily important Senatorial election campaign of 1858 two of Lincoln's (and his party's) difficulties emerged. One was rivalry for control of the party itself. The most conspicuous strain was between Norman B. Judd (Chairman of the State Central Committee and a Lincoln supporter) and John Wentworth. In order to weaken Judd's power Wentworth was touted for nomin-18 New York Evening Post, 22 September 1858, quoted in Sparks, Lincoln-Douglasbates, 261. Inc. inc. Pop. 1860 Inc. inc. 63,449 211 163,873 70,396 75 65,415 225 266,196 171,688 182 34,493 95 229,102 136,099 146 44,166 115 220,764 118,923 117 34,234 71 157,069 63,869 69 15,983 18 176,194 70,982 67 16,439 53 161,119 77,237 92 28,764 45 159,277 65,832 71 10,866 34 151,140 58,310 66 ation for Senator. Lincoln handled this deftly: he timed his "House Divided" speech delivery when the State Convention met, planning it as bid for the nomination.19 It won that result: he was declared to be the party's "first and only" choice. Wentworth was nominated and elected Mayor of Chicago. The second difficulty was much more serious. It was a recurrence of the cleavage between the old Whigs and the abolitionists in the party. Although in 1858 there was nothing corresponding to the Fillmore ticket of 1856, the conservative Whigs in the Republican party could, and did, attempt to nominate conservatives and prevent the nomination of abolitionist candidates for Congress and for the Legislature. Some Whigs sought to displace Lovejoy by running Judge T. Lyle Dickey in the Third District. Judge David Davis and Whig lawyers of his circuit were working under cover to that end. A Quaker abolitionist apprized Lincoln of the situation.20 There is a report . . . that thou and some others are conspiring to defeat . . . Lovejoy. ... An attempt is made to excite a jealousy between the old free soilers & the old Whigs and Americans. ... No free soiler has . . . bolted a republican nomination because the candidate was from the whig or democratic party. .. . Two former Free Soilers, now Republicans, pointed out that Many prominent members of the Republican Party in their electioneering against Mr. Lovejoy's nomination are arguing . . . that it will never do 19 CW 11:457, 461-469, 472. 20 Abraham Smith, 5th month, 1858, 6th month 4th 1858 to Lincoln, RTLP.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 17 to send him again on account of his abolitionism." . . . Our party is a composite one and has diverse elements whose tastes and feelings ought to be carefully handled until time renders* us a homogeneous mass. Such arguments, or rather such appeals to old prejudices that ought to be forgotten, only serve to perpetuate our original diversities and to retard very much the complete fusion which must take place before we can hope to become a power in the land.21 Judge Davis acknowledged that the charge was true, and argued to justify what was attempted.22 But Lincoln quashed the opposition to Lovejoy and opposed the running of independent candidates. This incident had costly result; Judge Dickey went over to Douglas, and executed a coup which had damaging effect. And Lincoln in his speeches: took more advanced ground. That is the significance of the "House Divided" speech, and except as necessary modifications were made a more advanced position on slavery characterized his speeches from that time. Not that he was, or became, radical. He was subtle. He made shrewd use of ambiguity. Thus the "House Divided" speech, and other speeches, pleased the free soilers and abolitionists as embodying their principles, while moderates 21 John H. Bryant and Stephen D. Paddock to Lincoln, 4 June 1858, RTLP. 22 Judge Davis to Lincoln, 14 June 1858, RTLP; he put the point in corollary: "The Republican party is a confederated, not a consolidated, party." Ward Lamon also took the conservative side: "I believe the whole country is fast going to the Devil! The counties of McLean and LaSalle in their primary meetings have instructed their delegates to the Congressional Convention for Lovejoy .... I fear that Lovejoy's election a second term will put this Congressional District irremedially in the hands of the abolitionists." (Lamon to Lincoln, 9 June 1858, RTLP.) Although Lincoln accepted and supported Lovejoy in 1858 he was in full agreement with the conservatives in 1856. "It turned me blind when I first heard Swett was beaten, and Lovejoy nominated; but after much anxious reflection, I really believe it is best to let it stand." (CW IIL347, 458f.) and conservatives could understand them as commitment to no more than opposition to the extension of slavery.23 They had exactly this effect. The Quaker who had written about the conspiracy against Lovejoy now wrote, "Thou hast taken high ground."24 Some old Whigs followed Judge Dickey and went over to Douglas. But most Re-publicans remained loyal. To hold them, and to win conservatives, Lincoln modified his position where it was politic to do so. Douglas made the most of Republican sectional diversity, showing that Lincoln and the party were abolitionist in the north, moderate in the center, and conservative in the south. At Freeport Douglas read from the record that Republicans in the north were pledged not to support candidates unless these candidates pledged themselves to work for the repeal of the fugitive slave act and to oppose the admission of more slave States· to the Union. Had they secured Lincoln's pledge? he demanded.25 If so, Lincoln had violated it.26 If they had not secured his pledge they could not in conscience support him. Douglas put his question to Thomas Turner, a former Democrat, now a Republican, who had been Lincoln's colleague in Congress; Turner had written the resolution quoted. Lincoln in agitation grasped Turner by the arm and commanded, "Don't answer that, Turner; you have no right to answer."27 23 See the superb discussion of this point in Randall, Lincoln the President, 1:107, and the equally excellent discussion of the Lincoln-Douglas debates, ibid., 109-128. 24 Abraham Smith to Lincoln, 7th month, 20, 1858, RTLP. So also W. H. Hanna and J. H. Wickizer to Lincoln, 5 November 1858 and W. C. Hobbs, 27 July 1858; RTLP. 25 CW 111:63-65. 26 If Lincoln was bound he had indeed violated his pledge, and so had Washburne. Lincoln wrote to Washburne of rumors that Washburne was pledged against admitting more slave states, indicating that he hoped that this was not true. Washburne answered that the rumors were not true. (CW III:144f, Washburne to Lincoln, 20 September 1858, 27 CW 111:65.  18 THE ILIFF REVIEW Douglas also emphasized the "Negro equality" implication of Lincoln's appeal to the Declaration of Independence. This was very damaging in central and southern Illinois. John M. Palmer wrote to Lincoln that "Negro equality goes hard."28 The editor of the Chicago Journal wrote to Senator Trumbull that "if there is one rock more dangerous than another in the pathway of the Republican party it is this."29 Many of Lincoln's invitations to speak urged him to repudiate the whole idea.30 Judge Davis wrote of the critical situation in Tazewell County: "among the Kentuck-ians [of whom there were many in that Whig stronghold] it is circulated that you favor negro equality." He emphasized that party speakers must disavow this, and declare against Negroes voting, holding office, sitting on juries, and the like. Significantly the Judge ended his letter saying, "For God's sake don't let Lovejoy go into Tazewell."31 Lincoln did as advised. In the Charleston "debate" he completely disavowed belief in Negro equality, and retreated to an extremely conservative position on Negro civil rights.32 Yet Lincoln's inconsistency lost him nothing. He knew that his hedging in the center to get votes there would lose him no votes in the north. A discerning Republican wrote, "Our state, reaching over so many degrees of latitude, and embracing about an equal number of degrees of anti-slavery, creates some difficulty in satisfying all your friends. . . . Should expediency, logical conclusions, and your own judgment constrain you to take [a moderate position] I do 28 Palmer to Lincoln, 19 July 1858, RTLP. 29 Charles L. Wilson to Trumbull, 14 May 1858, Trumbull MSS, LC. 30 For example, Thomas A. Marshall to Lincoln, 22 July 1858, Hiram Tremble to Lincoln, 4 August 1858, C. W. Waite to Lincoln, 4 August 1858, RTLP. 31 David Davis to Lincoln, 3 August 1858, RTLP. 32 CW III:145ff. 33 L. D. Whiting to Lincoln, 23 August 1858, RTLP. not think it will cost you a single vote in the north."33 At least the broad cases of agreement had been reached. In a prepared speech Lincoln said that ... in our opposition [to the Kansas-Nebraska Act] . . . the people in the north end of the State were for stronger measures·. . . than we of the central and southern portions. . . . You at the north met in conventions and passed resolutions. We in the middle . . . and south did not. .. pass the same resolutions. . . . These meetings which the Judge has alluded to, were local, and did not spread over the whole State. We at last met together and agreed upon a common platform. You who held more extreme notions, either yielded them or . . . yielded them practically. . . . We agreed upon at platform for the party throughout the State . . . and we are now all bound io that platform.34 But the vital problem in the 1858 Senatorial campaign was the legislature. The Republicans had a majority of the voters in the State as a whole. But the issue now was party control of the legislature which would elect the Senator; there must be more Republican than Democratic votes cast for party candidates for that legislature. In this matter the Republicans were not so strong, nor were they sagacious. Democrats were elected to the legislature in districts* where Republicans were elected to Congress; some counties in these districts had Democratic majorities. In some state senatorial districts, consisting of two or more counties, one county might be Republican and another Democratic; everything depended upon the majority in the whole district. In some counties1 and districts the Republicans nominated weak candidates, and some who did not campaign actively.35 In the First Congressional District a fatal mistake was made: Republicans agreed to vote for Democrats for the legislature in return for Democratic 34 CW 111:71. 35 William Frinke to Lincoln, 30 July 1858, J. W. Hosford to Lincoln, 11 October 1858, Charles Denio to Lincoln, 27 September 1858, RTLP.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 19 votes for Washburne for Congress.36 And still there was that old question in the central counties: would old Whigs vote for Republicans for the legislature? Lincoln analyzed the area minutely, and advised how to win it. Again he recommended, in some counties, the nomination of Know-Nothings.37 Lincoln toiled valiantly and more effectively than ever before. There were hopeful factors. This time it was the Democrats who were divided; there were candidates of Douglas Democrats and National Democrats on the tickets.38 The federal patronage was· taken away from Douglas, with his appointees dismissed and Buchanan men put in their places. Anti-Douglas newspapers were established and subsidized. To some extent the patronage was used to aid Republicans.39 It was an off-year election, without the pull of loyalty to party for national control. But there were also unfavorable circumstances: Kansas no longer bled; the Lecompton Constitution had been rejected and it appeared that Kansas would be a free State. And by that same token Douglas's fight against Lecompton recommended him to many Republicans; one of Lin-36 Denio to Lincoln, ibid. 37 CW 11:443; analysis CW 11:476-481. Lincoln's dependence upon the Know-Nothings is evident: he calculated Republican strength by assuming (incorrectly) that the sum of the Fremont and the Fillmore vote in 1856 was the potential Republican vote in 1858. In a letter to Gillespie (CW 11:503) he pointed out that Gillespie must get four-fifths of the Fillmore vote to win. Gillespie lost. 38 Lincoln at first was overconfident because of this split. But the effectiveness of Douglas's campaign, and the lack of support for the National ticket canceled the apparent advantage. The Trumbull MSS contain many highly optimistic estimates (Beveridge, 11:544-553). Lincoln's most hopeful statement is in CW 111:443. 39 Lincoln avoided reference to this matter: CW III:471f. But see Milton, The Eve of Conflict, 302ff, and especially Herndon to Trumbull, 24 June 1858: "Lincoln does not know the details of how we get along. I do, but he does not. That kind of thing does not suit his tastes." coin's problems was Greeley's endorsement of Douglas.40 One unfavorable development must be noted in detail. Douglas's fight for the rejection of the Lecompton Constitution had won the admiration of both Seward and Crittenden in the Senate. Lincoln feared that Seward's praise would affect the Illinois voters, and he took steps to ascertain Seward's attitude so as to counter it if necessary.41 But Seward was careful not to allow his admiration of Douglas to be used against Lincoln. Crittenden, however, was drawn into the Illinois campaign. He affirmed his purpose not to intermeddle, but his influence could not be kept out. Thousands of Illinois Whigs would do as he advised. Some of them wrote to Crittenden, asking his advice. Lincoln heard of these inquiries, and wrote to Crittenden in some concern.42 At that time Crittenden avowed his neutrality, but when Judge T. Lyle Dickey broke with Lincoln over the Lovejoy nomination, and went over to Douglas, he wrote to Crittenden and received, with permission to publish, a letter warmly endorsing Douglas and expressing the hope that he would be re-elected. Dickey held this letter for nearly three months, and published it a week before the election. Some Republican leaders believed that the Crittenden letter was so effective that it decided the election: "Thus," said John 40 CW 11:430, 443f, 456f; Herndon and Weik, Lincoln, 11:59-65; Beveridge, 11:545-550. What Lincoln particularly feared was the influence of the circulation of Greeley's New York Tribune (estimated at 10,000 in Illinois) upon the former Whigs. 41 Josiah M. Lucas to Lincoln, 3 May 1858, James Watson Webb (Pokahoe, N. Y.), 9 June 1858, Chester P. Dewey (Rochester, N. Y.), 30 October 1858, R. R. Stephens (New York City), 24 June 1858, Samuel Baker, 6 September 1858, RTLP. Webb's letter states that he had visited Seward to ascertain whether Seward was intermeddling in Illinois; Seward said that while he greatly admired Douglas for opposing Buchanan he was entirely neutral in the campaign and was not advocating Douglas's re-election. 42 CW II:483f, III:335f.  20 THE ILIFF REVIEW Wentworth, "was Lincoln slain in Old Kentucky."43 The best that Lincoln could do was to ignore the Lecompton issue, and by stressing popular sovereignty, to represent that Kansas was still open to slavery. He emphasized the Dred Scott decision, and reiterated his "conspiracy" charge ("Stephen, Roger, Franklin and James"), upon which he set great store.44 He insisted that the Dred Scott decision, unless reversed, would be followed by others which would result in slavery being taken into the free states. 43 Dickey to Crittenden, 19 July 1858, Herndon to Crittenden, I November 1858 (Crittenden MSS, LC) ; W. P. Boyd to Crittenden, 17 July 1858: "The Democracy of Illinois will unite to a man on Douglas. Many old Whigs, having no shepherd and in doubt where to go, will readily turn to his fold" (ibid.). The Crittenden letter is printed in Whitney, Lincoln, 1:271-273. Judge Davis wrote to Lincoln (7 November 1858, RTLP) in great indignation over the action of Dicky and Crittenden. John Wentworth's Chicago Democrat, 9 November 1858, credited the letter with Lincoln's defeat. It was said by many at the time, and is still believed, that the legislative apportionment caused Lincoln's defeat. It must be borne in mind, however, that an explanation must be based upon what was, not upon what it may be considered ought to have been. It might be borne in mind, too, that there never was an apportionment which was generally regarded as fair ; Egypt is over-represented now, as it was then. It should be noted that Edwards County by thorough organizaion and zealous work turned a Democratic into a Republican majority (William Pickering to Gillespie, 19 December 1860; Gillespie Letters, Chicago Historical Society). It is inescapable that it was the effectiveness of Douglas's campaign that defeated the Republicans. 44 Lincoln wrote to Joseph Medili, editor of the Chicago Tribune, asking him to see to it that none of the Republican papers of Illinois say anything about the conspiracy charge until he (Lincoln) first made the charge "on the stump." Although others made the charge it is difficult to comprehend how Lincoln believed it. Trumbull expressed the idea to Chief Justice Caton of the Illinois Supreme Court; Caton replied that it was nonsense; that such talk was either stupid or sheer politics. "Come and spend a month with me and I will make a rational and sober man of you again" (Caton to Trumbull, 27 January 1858, Trumbull MSS, LC). Again Lincoln failed. Douglas won the election to the Senate by a clean-cut victory in the campaign. He defeated both the Republicans and the Buchanan Democrats. But Lincoln's defeat lost for him no luster. On the contrary, he gained. In that campaign Illinois was the cynosure of the nation.45 Lincoln built himself up, even in defeat. National leaders were observing him.46 After the election he made speeches in Iowa, Wisconsin, Kansas, and Ohio. He published the joint speeches with Douglas and other speeches of his own. He made the fullest use of the occasion of the Cooper Union speech; his work on it was masterly and the address is by all odds his best. After its delivery he spoke extensively in New England. By letters and in person he cultivated Republican leaders of the East and North. He authorized the publication of a sketch of his life. The purpose of all this was evident: by the Spring of 1860, as he wrote to Trumbull, the taste was in his mouth, and he used his great talent for political management to control the party in Illinois' so as to secure his nomination for the presidency. By 1860 time, the railroads, immigration into Illinois, emotional tension over slavery, and the diminution of Whig and nativist party membership had their culmination. The Republican party carried the State in all offices. It was still 45 Josiah M. Lucas, a Jacksonville, Ills., friend of Lincoln's, for years a department clerk in Washington-an experienced and credible observer of national politics-wrote Lincoln that "it is no less singular, than true, that almost every political move that is made in Illinois, however trivial, is known here" (letter, 15 June 1858, RTLP). 46 Lucas reported ( 3 May, 1858, RTLP) that Seward spoke highly of Lincoln. The Stephens and Dewey letters cited in Note 41 are to the same effect. Samuel Baker, in a letter copied by Lincoln (6 Septtmber 1858, RTLP), reported that Seward had made the suggestion that Bell of Tennessee be induced to speak in Illinois in Lincoln's interest. Lucas (5 June 1858, RTLP) tells of an appeal made by Richard W. Thompson of Indiana that Lincoln retire in favor of Douglas, with the compensation that Lincoln would be appointed Secretary of the Interior.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 21 a weak minority in Egypt, and it was far from strong in the central area, but the massive population increase, especially in the north, brought it a decisive majority. Thus Lincoln's role in the early life of the Republican party in Illinois was important, although he had nothing to do with its birth. He reoriented a party which with its original leadership could never have been more than a sectional movement within a key State. Naturally conservative himself, he made the party conservative. This was realistic and rational. His efforts with Whigs and Know-Nothings, at first unsuccessful, ultimately bore considerable fruit.47 He was hard put to it to reconcile the heterogeneous elements-the Anti-Nebraska Democrats, the Free Soilers, the abolitionists, the Whigs and the Know-47 The negligible Bell vote in 1860 (4, 913) shows that the old Whigs and Know-Nothings had joined one party or the other; probably most of the 1856 Fillmore supporters in 1856 voted for Lincoln in 1860. Nothings-who coalesced to form the new party, and to avoid local schisms and intra-party rivalries; he managed to do both. He used the party for his advantage, as he must do to realize his ambition for high office. He was opportunistic and successful in manipulating party leaders and candidates, and in awarding place to former Democrats, Whigs, and Know-Nothings. He was politic and wise to keep abolitionists in the background. He was effective in phrasing issues into statements of principle and in touching them with emotional fervor. Immigration and population increase favored him and his party; he utilized these factors advantageously. The repudiated ex-Congressman, the twice-defeated Senatorial candidate, the ambitious politician in search of a party found what he needed in the young Republican movement. From the moment of joining it he deftly influenced it, shaped it, managed it, and as its foremost spokesman he brought himself and it to victory.   }udg,e Cliao 3. oyer: Jiartyrea Son o/ 3atker $ohn *Ç. Juger LOWELL B. SWAN The Rev. John L. Dyer, pioneer Methodist minister, whose labors in Colorado earned him the affectionate name of "Father Dyer," walked into Denver from Minnesota on June 20,1861. His horse had been carelessly allowed to founder by an inn-keeper on the way and had to be sold; his purse and pocket-knife had been stolen; and his meager possessions included a gun and his watch. Tragedy had come to him many times in his forty-nine years. He had lost his wife some twelve years before and an infant daughter of thirteen months soon afterwards. He had married a woman who had one husband who had died but one who was still living, and she had not been divorced. So it was necessary for him to go through a divorce and he suffered greatly from a deep sense of guilt. But he was destined to face much more tragedy which we would like to recount to you. Elias Dyer, the second son of Father Dyer, had preceded his father to Denver by one year and was working in Mr. Sprague's store in West Denver. After visiting with his son for a few days and also preaching in the Methodist Episcopal Church on the next Sunday evening for Rev. Mr. Kenny, the new pastor, Father Dyer set out for the mountains hoping to work around Buckskin Joe. He had swapped his watch for about twenty dollars worth of provisions-flour, side-bacon, dried apples, coffee, sugar, salt, and a few cans of fruit. Elias gave his father a buffaloskin and a quilt for bedding. This is the only reference to this young man until much later. In 1872, he had a visit from his sister, Rachel, who had helped him raise his LOWELL B. SWAii is minister of Warren Methodist Church, Denver, Colorado, and vice president of the Rocky Mountain Conference Methodist Historical Society. children after his widowerhood. They decided to take a trip to the mountains to see his son, Elias, who was working a mine near Horseshoe Pass. It was known as the Dyer mine and was later sold to H. A. W. Tabor for three thousand dollars. On July 4, 1875, tragedy struck for Father Dyer. He writes: "When the 4th of July, 1875, came we had dinner and some speaking-a very pleasant time-in a grove. I remember how comfortable I felt in realizing what liberty and blessings we had in our United States, and how thankful we ought to be for them, although they had cost the blood of so many of our friends. About that same time, at Granite, in Lake County, they were interring my son, who had been murdered by a lawless mob-of which dreadful tradegy I heard the next day. The particulars I will relate at the close of this year's record. The shock of this affliction almost overcame me. My boy was gone! What should I do? Temptations arose like a torrent, and nought but vengeance presented itself. But the Spirit whispered: 'Vegeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord'."1 Father Dyer knew Lake County very well. He had served as probate judge there for one year. His account of the happenings in the County preceding the murder of his son are very lengthy, much too lengthy for this article. However, we will try to condense much of it in order that the whole story may be understood. There was a group of men in the county who ran things to suit themselves, perhaps forty or fifty or even more, whom Dyer calls a lawless mob. They were prone to treat newcomers with harshness unless they cowed before their strength. 1John Dyer, The Snovjshoe Itinerant, Cranston and Stowe, Cincinnati: 1889, p. 282. 23  24 THE ILIFF REVIEW A newcomer, Elijah Gibbs, happened to be of sterner stuff and refused to be stampeded. Consequently, he was soon at odds with this reigning group. In an argument with a man by the name of Harrington, open warfare nearly broke out. One night Harrington was murdered and Gibbs was accused of the crime. However, although circumstances did not seem to point to him this group decided to take justice into their own hands. After his trial and acquittal, they visited him at night and ordered him to come out of his house or they would burn him and his family out. He refused and began to defend himself. In the melee that followed, two of the mob were shot and killed by Gibbs and this mob withdrew. He was able to escape with his family and came to Denver for a time. But the mob began a reign of terror in the county, rounding up innocent people, subjecting them to a type of inquisition if they defended Gibbs and even hanging some for a time in order to change their minds. At this time, Elias Dyer was the probate judge and was travelling in the circuit in order to hear cases. While on his way to Granite to hold court, he was overtaken by four men who took him by force to a school house where many were being held and questioned. These were those believed to hold that Gibbs was innocent of murder and that he was right in defending his home. A mock court was held to ascertain whether these men sympathized with Gibbs, and Judge Dyer was among the accused. Some of the men were encouraged in their testimony by being lifted off the floor by having a rope around their neck. Judge Dyer was finally released from custody, but his pony was gone and he was forced to stay in the neighborhood over night. The next morning, he was hauled before the "court" again and was handed a written sentence: "Chalk Creek, Lake County January 29, 1875 Judge Dyer-you are hereby notified to resign your office as probate judge, and leave this county within thirty days, by order of the Committee of Safety.2" He was restored his pony and proceeded to leave Chalk Creek, but was further stopped and ordered to go to Fairplay. This was finally accomplished after real hardship and the judge made his way to Denver and then to Castle Rock. He wrote to his father from there: Castle Rock, February 8, 1875 "Dear Parents: "I write you from Sam's. Came up from Denver to Clint's last night. Am intending to go back to Denver tommor-row. Have had a terrible time of it, but begin to see our way out. Am intending to proceed against them for attempted assassination, and for damages, as some of them have means. Gave note to Sam, and what McPherson says. I did believe, and do believe, Gibbs innocent of the crime accused of; but minded my own business, and did nothing but my duty as a good, law-abiding citizzen, and nothing but what a Christian might do with a clear and approving conscience. I have done nothing that you or any of the connection need blush for, nor what you would not have felt compelled to do under the same circumstances. I am proud and glad to have been able to assist the suffering innocent, even in as humble a manner as I did. My advice and influence has been after the teachings of Christ, and I feel that God approves all my words and acts in this matter. I feel that I have lost and suffered more than the rest of my friends; but I believe that good will come of all: and I have learned not to distrust God or his ways, but have full confidence that, somewhere in all the boundless future, he will make all even, and give me that rest for which I long. The path of duty is the path of safety. I feel it, and shall act accordingly. Many good people are praying for me and my work; and they can do no more; for their hands are tied. I pray constantly to be able to work without fear, and with malice toward none. "Will be to see you as soon as I can, 2 Ibid., p. 308.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 25 but can't say exactly when; but in the meantime, believe me, I will endeavor, by the help of God, to do all my duty and nothing wrong. "If you have time to write a line to Denver, it would reach me. Yours very, very truly, Elias F. Dyer."8 "All of us are together today." Judge Dyer tells how he is prepared to move against the mob with warrants but that he hesitated to do so only on his own, and there was no one with courage enough to swear them out. He also mentions that some of the mob are beginning to leave the county out of fear, but that those remaining were pretty belligerent. The next letter came from James H. Johnston, informing the father of his son's death by the hand of an assassin or assassins at half-past eight o'clock on the morning of July 3, 1875. He enclosed a letter from the Judge to his father, his last one: Granite, July 3, 1875 "Dear Father: "I don't know that the sun will ever rise and set for me again, but I trust in God and his mercy. At eight o'clock I sit in court. The mob have me under guard. Mr. Gilland is missing this morning, I do not think harm has befallen him. God bless you, my father, in your old age, and in Sam and his boy-in all your children-but you know John bears the name. Bless him and his forever, O my God! "My love to all friends, and I say I am proud to be your son. There is no cowardice in me, father. I am worthy of you in this respect. God comfort you and keep you always. I am, in this one respect, like Him who died for all; I die, if die I must, for law, order, and principle; and too, I stand alone. "Your loving and true, and, I hope in some respects, worthy son, Elias F. Dyer."4 The Rocky Mountain News, dated two 4 Ibid., pp. 313 f. 8 Ibid., pp. 310 f. In a letter to his father, dated May 30th, days later, carried an item from Fairplay: "This place is the scene of terrible excitement over a tragedy that, used as all are here to deeds of blood, strikes the entire community with a horror not felt for many a day. The feud which has divided Lake County into two factions, each equally lawless, although one purporting to be the representative of order and legal authority, ever since the shooting of Harrington by Elisha Gibbs over a year ago, which resulted in the night attack on Gibb's house on the 22nd of last January, to the mortal harm of two of the assailants, and the final running of Gibbs out of the country, has culminated in the murder of Judge Dyer, of the Probate Court of this County, for no other crime, apparently, than endeavoring to his duty. The particulars, as near as I have been able to collect them, are as follows. Dyer had issued sixteen warrants for the arrest of members of the so-called Committee of Safety, and deputized Doctor Dabbins to arrest them. The latter returned the warrants, saying he had showed them to one Burnett, but had no means of bringing him to Granite. Dyer then deputized a man named Sites, who proceeded to carry out the order. He went immediately to Brown Creek, and arrested, first, Burnett, and afterwards Chaffin, a ringleader of the Safety Committee faction, and a man named Moore. Sites then went up the river to make other arrests, and, on returning to Brown Creek, met Weldon, the sheriff of Lake County, who told him to give him the warrants as he could make more arrests in one day than he (Sites) could in three weeks. Sites gave him the warrants, and last Friday evening the sheriff of Lake County, with about thirty armed men, came to Granite a little before dark. The mob took Dyer to the court-room. Fifteen or twenty citizens followed, but were ordered back. What transpired in the court-room no one knows. When Dyer came out, he was very pale. He immediately went to Johnson's store, and wrote a letter. That night he was guarded, and the next morning the mob again took him  26 THE ILIFF REVIEW to the court-house. A few moments after entering, they came out, but shortly afterwards, they returned, and, as they were passing up the stairs, four shots were fired. One ball struck Dyer on the arm. When he found himself wounded, he begged for his life; but the assassins finished him by shooting him in the head at the back of the right ear, the ball lodging beneath the left eye-brow. He lived fifteen minutes, and was conscious, but unable to speak. While Dyer lay weltering in his blood, and in the death agony, John D. Coon, ringleader of the mob, bent over him, exclaiming, 'What a horrible murder.' which sentiment is reechoed by the men hereabouts, who are aching to hang Mr. Coon for his share in the crime. I will endeavor to collect further details of subsequent occurrences as I shall be able to gather them, but do so at the peril of my life, if any of the Committee of Safety learn of my taking such action."5 An editorial in the same issue said in part: "The story told in our Fairplay dispatch will strike the entire community with horror. Making all allowances for the exaggeration natural under the circumstances, the account stares us in the face with an apparently unprovoked and cold-blooded murder. At the rate we are going on, Colorado will soon earn a reputation that will make her a stench in the nostrils of respectable people."6 An official account of the murder was sent to Governor Routt in Denver, who offered his assistance if and when the facts could be presented in the case. An editorial in the same paper the next day said rather strongly: "It is equally an unfortunate thing for the territory at large. There are very few people, especially if they are of an invalid turn of body, from which classes so much of our population has been drawn, who will care to come to a country where probate judges are murdered by committees of safety headed by sheriffs of 5 Rocky Mountain News, Vol. XVI, July 6, 1875, p. 1. 6 Ibid, page 1. the county. Colorado will get a bad name that will render her noisome throughout the nation, unless some effectual measures are taken to stamp out, once and forever, the tendency to resort to mob law that is now so prevalent in many places within her boundaries."7 In conclusion, there are three or four other facets to this incident of tragedy. In this book, The Snowshoe Itinerant Father Dyer also reprints an article from that region's newspaper which was highly critical and even slanderous about his son. He probably did so out of the strict desire to present all sides even though he could not accept them as true. What a rugged character this pioneer preacher displayed! The Governor did offer a reward of two hundred dollars for the arrest and conviction of those involved in the murder, but on one was ever brought to justice for the crime. Strange also was the fact that one member of this "Committee of Safety" was elected Probate Judge and was the one to oversee the settlement of Judge Dyer's estate. The way in which it was being handled forced the father to send his other son and lawyer up to Lake County and only by threatening to expose the whole proceedings was anything realized from the estate. The accounts against the estate had just equalled the assets to the dollar. But stranger yet, ever more strange than fiction, was the recollection of Father Dyer that when he was crossing Mosquito Pass in the middle sixties carrying mail and gold from Buckskin Joe to California Gulch, he had given permission for a man to travel with him. This man had become so cold and tired on the long, arduous climb that he wanted to sit down and rest at the summit. To do so in that midnight cold was sure death, and so Father Dyer tells how he literally kicked the man down the mountain in order to save his life. That man turned out to be a member of the mob that killed his son! 7 Ibid., Vol. XVI, July 7, 1875, p. 2.  Pietiam and JrlethodiJnt in Sweden WAYNE L. STARK HE Protestant Reformation is often viewed, but not altogether understood, against the background of an emerging nationalism in Europe with its associated economic transitions, and the rebirth of learning. There is obviously no way of isolating the revolutionary upheaval of the Reformation either from its antecedents or its total environment of the sixteenth century. The same is true of the rise of Pietism, Methodism, and their related impact on the world of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in England and Sweden. The intent of this paper is to evaluate and appreciate the extent of the contribution Pietism and Methodism made to the religious life of Sweden. By the eighteenth century, the Swedish State and the Lutheran Church were so merged together that it would be inconceivable to think of one without the other. Working in conjunction with the government, the church had constructed an organization which supposedly was to safeguard and disseminate pure doctrine, and which through mandatory catechising of a community would give the church strict control over the total enterprise of religious indoctrination. On the surface this would appear to be an ideal situation. But much to the contrary the established church ran too much like a well oiled machine and through its various ministrations with automatic precision stamped out a society that had an awareness of religion without the practical evidences of its effects. As early as the year 1686 the State Church was placed completely under the domina-WAYNE L. STARK is minister of the Leyden Covenant Church of Denver and a graduate of the University of Illinois and North Park Seminary. This paper was prepared for a seminar taught by Professor Rist, tion of the government. A State Church handbook was adopted in 1693, the hymnal in 1686, and a system of religious education developed for youth. Such a combination evoked a patriotic implication that meant to criticize the Lutheran Church was criticism of the State. In the year 1723 a commission was appointed in Sweden to investigate the heresy of Pietism. As a result a law against heretics, "The Conventicle Placate," was passed which forbade laymen to gather in a home for a service and the observance of the Lord's Supper without the presence of the parish priest. This law remained on the books until 1858. Enforcement of the law could mean for a violator a sentence of a fine, imprisonment, or actual banishment. In the latter part of the eighteenth century, Sweden was influenced by French atheism and German rationalism. These became fashionable in Sweden and such influences led to a revision of the State Church handbook and psalm book. This new handbook, tainted with rationalistic philosophy, appeared in 1811. This caused much unrest and unhappiness among some of the clergy and some of the people who continued to be conservative in their convictions. Another ingredient that induced the continued spread of Pietism in thought and life in Sweden, was the national problem of drunkenness. There were 170,000 distilleries in Sweden, plus an unknown number of stills that were in operation for home consumption. It is estimated that by 1830 the per capita consumption of intoxicating liquor was thirty-four quarts.1 Drunkenness was openly blamed for the growing demoralization of people, especially among the working lass, for 1Florence Janson, The Background ofish Immigration (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1931), p. 173, 27  28 THE ILIFF REVIEW Ł ç creased poverty crime, and for the nation's general stagnation. Because many clergymen gave no outward appearance of opposition to drunkenness, and because many entered the pulpit in a condition which made them unfit to preach, sincere Christians became all the more distressed and in turn were attracted to Pietism. And then, in Sweden as in England a century before, preaching was often a coldly formulated dissertation on doctrine that had little or no practical significance for the people. As in England, so in Sweden a century later, preaching left a large segment of the population in the midst of a personally unrelated and relatively unsatisfying State Lutheran Church orthodoxy. George Stephenson, in his book, The Religious Aspects of Swedish Immigration, comments on this situation by saying that local pastors knew far more about liturgies, symbolics, and dogmatics than they did about pastoral theology. The church was in the grip of frigid mechanical forms· which quenched the spirit and gave the people the dry husks of formalism. The omission of any part of the liturgy was regarded with horror.2 It almost goes without saying, that some sort of reform or separation was inevitable in nineteenth century Sweden. The soil in which Pietism grows and matures existed in Sweden at this particular time and Pietism was to be that movement that brought about reform but eventually separation from the established church. A thesis of this paper is that the elemental emphasis of Pietism is a return to the Biblical portrayal of man as a sinner, Christ as Redeemer, and Justification by Faith as its key doctrine. To this can be added the fact, that Pietism in Germany and Sweden was basically experiential rather than doctrinal and that the impact Wesley made upon England was also experien-2 George M. Stephenson, The Religious Aspects of Swedish Immigration (Minneapolis: The University of Minnesota, 1932), p. 5. tial rather than doctrinal. This is not to say that such men as Spener and Francke in Germany had no doctrinal interests. After all they were men of considerable academic attainments and with their roots deep in the SOU of German Lutheranism it would be absurd to rule out their almost inherent interest and absorption with doctrine. In England, John Wesley was not a systematic theologian, but we would be in error to minimize his contribution to theology. He did, however, like Francke and Spener see the imperative and importance of Christianity as an experience of God's grace and forgiveness by faith in Christ. The appeal of the Wesleyan Revival, as well as Pietism in Germany and later in Sweden, was not to weighty and abstract theological discourses on politics or church law, but rather there was the simple appeal to the sinner that by God's grace and love he could be joyously freed from the guilt of sin. This was God's offer to all men, in contrast to Calvin-istic determinism, and this theme is to be found in both Wesleyan and Pietistic hymnody. Nagler chooses to define Pietism, as related to Spener and Francke in Germany, as a reaction against the orthodoxy of the Lutheran Church. Perhaps Weinlick's definition is more detailed and more illustrative of the Pietistic movement that had its origins in Germany, that had an influence upon Methodism, and which made a meaningful impact on Swedish religious' life. Wien-lick writes: One of the great forces of the era was Pietism, a spiritual renewal arising within German Lutheranism in the seventeenth century and spreading to other nations. Though in a narrow sense the term Pietism is associated with Germany, it is a type of Christianity not confined to any place or period; for it means a Christianity of experience as opposed to emphasis upon creed and outer conformity.3 With this in mind we can say that Pietism springs out of the religious· needs 3 John R. Weinlick, Count Zinssendorf (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1956), pp. 7-8.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 29 of the people which in turn are related to the social, economic and political situation of the day. In its origin, Pietism was a reform movement within the confines of the established church and was not intended to be a separatists movement. Even Zinzendorf was convinced that his Moravian Brethren were within the Lutheran Church laboring for its purity and not for separation. Early in the eighteenth century Pietism entered Sweden from Germany. The printed page aroused interest in a more Christ-centered and personally devout type of faith and life. Visitors returning from the continent also brought word of the work of Francke in Halle. Weinlick, in his biography of Count Zinzendorf, says that workers from Herrnhut had been visiting Pietistic societies in Sweden since 1731. We also know that in 1735 Zinzendorf went to Copenhagen to certify his Lutheran convictions to the King and the clergy in Denmark. He left Denmark and sailed to Sweden where he visited the Bishop of Lund and another lodai pastor who had asked to see him.4 After returning to Herrnhut, Zinzendorf received word from Stockholm forbidding him to settle in Sweden. To this, Zinzendorf wrote a lengthy and detailed report to Sweden's King. As Weinlick says, "It was another of the Count's supreme efforts to convince the powers that be that there was room within Lutheranism for what he was trying to do."5 The sixteenth century revolution we term the Protestant Reformation had as its key theme that men are not justified before God by inherent goodness, by works of personal merit, or by the authoritative word of the church, but by faith alone. Lutheranism has undoubtedly given a valid and permanent contribution to Methodism through Luther's discovery of this vital Biblical truth. Although John Wesley was critical of some of Luther's· writings, 4 Ibid., p. 123. 5 Ibid., p. 123. the fact still remains that it was through Luther's commentary onans and his commentary on Galatians that John and his brother Charles realized the futility of a religion of works and the necessity of justification by faith in Christ. The Methodist, Philip Watson in his book on Luther's theology pointedly remarks: John and Charles Wesley did not, of course, become Lutherans, nor yet Moravians; and Methodism both had and has its own peculiar ethos. Yet deeper than all differences is the essential spirit, in which the Wesleys are more nearly akin to Luther than to any other great exponent of the Christian faith and life.6 Watson goes on to express the conviction that the Evangelical Revival was fundamentally a renewal and extension of the work of Luther and the Reformation. Wesley's Aldersgate experience then was an enlightening one in which Luther's comments in the preface to his commentary on Romans introduced him to a God of love who seeks' by grace to justify men through faith. As Edgar M. Carlson significantly points out in his book, The Reinterpretation of Luther, Luther's theology revolves around the gracious will of God that in love searches for man's faith.7 John Wesley's heart was "strangely warmed" by his encounter with a God who lovingly stands* ready to give men justification by faith. What actually happened at Aldergate will, I suppose, always be open to question. From the Pietistic viewpoint, if Aldersgate was not John Wesley's point of conversion it was at least the monumental experience that Wesley sought and found with the help of the Moravian Pietists. A study of Wesley's life clearly indicates that many factors merged to form his spiritual experience. While in Georgia the German Moravian Spangeburg, and then later in England his conversations with the Pietist Peter Bonier, emphasized 6 Philip S. Watson, Let God Be God (Philadelphia: Muhlenberg Press, 1949) p. 3. 7 Edgar M. Carlson, The Reinterpretation of Luther (Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 1948), p. 29,  30 THE ILIFF REVIEW the personal acceptance of God's justifying act in Christ. They helped Wesley grasp the fact that faith, although a gift from God, becomes a human response to the redeeming deed provided by Christ for man's salvation. There were differences that arose among Wesley, the Moravians, and Count Zinzendorf in particular, but their significant contribution of the personal application of salvation by the experience of faith cannot be minimized or overlooked. There were points of disagreement and the mystical element in continental Pietism was something that Wesley could not tolerate. In addition to this Wesley urged repentance but not the morbid and extreme experience of repentance as was true of the Pietism at Halle under Francke's teaching. Wesley feared that mysticism which becomes too introspective and possesses too much individualism. This is why he could not support Molther's teaching regarding "Stillness" that ruled out the significance of the church, attendance at the sacraments, and even beneficial good works. The individual was merely by faith alone to wait for the blessing of justification. Wesley was too active a man to be held back in his work, nor was he willing to give the church and the sacraments a place of insignificance, and he above all feared an unreal mysticism. Whatever differences existed between Wesley and the Moravians, we still must conclude with Nagler that Pietism was instrumental in helping Wesley break away from the legalism of his former piety and this transformed the ritualist of Oxford into the great Evangelical Preacher of the eighteenth century.8 Comment has already been made on conditions in Sweden that prompted the rise of Pietism and the establishing of laws to stem the tide of interest in this movement as a force within the 8 Arthur Nagler, Pietism and Methodism (Nashville: Publishing House M. E. Church South, 1918), p. 180. State Church. In Sweden the Protestant Reformation may have marked a departure from Roman Catholic doctrine but not from its organization and autocratic role. Until well along into the nineteenth century every child had to be baptized within eight days of birth and if the parents refused to allow this, then action could be brought against them in the civil courts. As late as the middle of the nineteenth century, every confirmed person by law was to go to Communion at least once a year in order to enjoy the rights of citizenship in Sweden, to be a court witness, or to marry.9 Threats, warning and legislation could not terminate the Pietistic movement and the spiritual awakening that was to come to Sweden. From both America and England, Sweden received the pulsating enthusiasm of economic, social and religious movements. This included the appeal for immigration to America, the rise of new industry, Pietism, and the Methodist movement. Our interest revolves around the religious spirit and mood in nineteenth century Sweden and the Pietistic and Methodist movements. The first Methodists in Sweden were English workmen employed by Samuel Owen, who had been invited to Stockholm in 1806 as a specialist in the construction of new steam engines. Samuel Owen built the first power units for Swedish steamboats. He was a strong supporter of temperance and the Methodist Church. To satisfy the spiritual needs of his workers, he built a Methodist Chapel and brought ministers1 from England to care for their spiritual needs. Joseph Stephens had ministered to these English workers from 1826 to 1830. But the real impact of Methodism upon Sweden was to be reserved for a young Methodist preacher, born in Edinburgh, who was to labor in Sweden from 1830 to 1842. His name was George Scott. So vital was his ministry to his own people and to the Swedes that he Stephenson, op. cit., p. 2.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 31 is often referred to as the "progenitor" of the free church movement in Sweden. As one writer says of Scott, "He had not only spiritual zeal but also a dynamic personality and on both religious reform in Sweden and the further stimulation of emigration to America he was to exercise a wide-spread influence."10 Scott was a disciple of John Wesley and as a Methodist revivalist preacher he spoke not only to his own countrymen but also to the Swedish people who came in great numbers to hear him. Within one year he had mastered the Swedish language and as a result preached to large crowds·. During his stay in Sweden, Scott became aware of the spiritual needs of the Swedish people and also one of their conscientious helpers. Although often critical of the standards of the people and the practices of the State Church, he still held the people and the established church in high regard. Scott soon associated himself with the Swedish Bible Society, but the main effort of his work was in the area of temperance. The problem of excessive drinking in nineteenth century Sweden has already been mentioned, but its seriousness cannot be exaggerated. George Scott gave himself unreservedly for the promotion of temperance with the approval of his employer, Mr. Owen. Temperance was to be one of the main results of this revival period as it was both in America and Europe. Temperance agitation had existed in Sweden prior to 1826 but Scott gave the movement the voice and the push it needed. One of Scott's first moves was with the assistance of a temperance aid, to publish a booklet entitled Information About the Recently Organized American Temperance Society· His next move was a reprint in Swedish of the Six Sermons on Temperance by Reverend Lyman Beecher. This, coupled with Scott's fervent sermons on temperance, 10 Benson and Hedin, Americans From Sweden (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1950), p. 67. struck a new note of moral examination and religious concern among the Swedish people. Gradually Scott became known in Sweden and although the law forbade the Swedes to go to a foreign chapel they still came to hear him preach. Undoubtedly Scott made a positive contribution to the moral rejuvenation of Sweden in this century. By 1834 the temperance campaign was well under way and had even gained the support of Crown Prince Oscar who presided over a large rally in Stockholm. In 1836 Scott welcomed an American, the Reverend Robert Baird, a Presbyterian who was touring Europe in the interest of temperance. Baird had written a book regarding the temperance movement and while in Paris the book was translated into French. Scott, who by this time had gained the acquaintance of Sweden's King, introduced Baird to him. Having received a copy in French of Baird's book, the King obtained permission to have it printed in Swedish and ordered a copy sent to every clergyman in Sweden. The clergy could hardly ignore the King's interest in temperance even if the Methodist Scott was a leading figure in its advance. Before the end of 1836 a young Swedish pastor from Smaland, named Wieselgren, became a fiery temperance leader. Based on the American model he organized a Swedish Temperance Society. While Scott was in England, in 1837, he wrote a letter to Wieselgren in which he expressed confidence that the temperance movement in Sweden was now on solid ground and gaining energy.11 In 1840 Robert Baird returned to Sweden and he and Scott made a preaching tour of the country. This tour had far-reaching consequences although they found some opposition from the State Church. The clergy as a class often frowned on the temperance movement that worked from outside of the State Church and because they were assisted 11 Gunnar Westin, George Scott Och Hans Verksamhet I Sverige (Uppsala: Almqvist and Wiksells, 1928), pp. 225-226.  32 THE ILIFF REVIEW by Pietists and Methodists the movement was often accused of fanaticism. Even Wieselgren was often wrongly criticized for the part he was playing in temperance. It is interesting to note, however, that in 1840 a Swedish Temperance Society meeting was held in the Southern part of Sweden in the State Lutheran Church of Jonkoping. Chief speakers included both Wieselgren and George Scott. One of the by products of this movement was the fact that many State Church pastors who were interested in the temperance advance and who did not reject Pietism, eventually came to the United States and formed the Swedish Lutheran Church in America. One such pastor was Paul Esbjorn, who left Sweden with a group of countrymen bound for America in 1849. Esbjorn had been influenced by Scott and Wieselgren and took this temperance enthusiasm with him to the new land. When the party of approximately one hundred and forty reached America, Ebjorn, who had made an appeal for financial aid from the Methodists, learned from O. G. Hed-strom that he could only receive aid from the Methodists if he was willing to become a Methodist. Esbjorn was unwilling to do this and instead made another appeal and was granted aid from the American Home Missionary Society of the Congregational Church for his work among the Lutheran Swedish immigrants of Illinois.12 Before continuing with Scott's work in Sweden it would be profitable to take a brief look at the nineteenth century Swedish dissenters which neither rationalism nor legislation could stamp out. Stephenson believes that the nineteenth century awakening in Sweden was in effect a second religious reformation in Sweden.13 This he feels was just as profound and as radical as that which took place in the sixteenth century. This movement in Sweden, as was true in England, touched the common 12Janson, op. cit., p. 186. 13 Stephenson, op. cit., p. 24. people and was not so much a new statement of doctrine but rather the experience by faith of Biblical truth. The similarity to the Wesleyan Revival is obvious. For the most part these dissenters were loyal Lutherans although some did embrace Methodist, Baptist and Mor-man teachings. These Lutheran Pietists were usually regular in their church attendance, read Lutheran devotional materials, and insisted they had as much right to meet for spiritual enjoyment such as Bible reading and prayer, and hymn singing, as did others who assembled undisturbed to dance, play cards, and drink. By the year 1840, these dissenters were grouped under the general term "Lasare" or readers. The term originated out of the practice of meeting in homes for Bible study, prayer, and singing. As we have previously seen, Pietism or Herrnhutism, had entered Sweden almost a century before this. A man by the name of Anders Rustrom, who was banished from Sweden in 1765, was their main spokesman. It would be outside of the framework of this presentation to trace the chronological history of the Lasare movement other than to give its characteristics and final result. As in America, the 1840's saw an amazing manifestation of strange and often peculiar religious responses. Sma-land was the scene of what some termed a disease known as "preaching sickness" and this spread to other provinces where people came under the spell of revivalistic preaching. The most influential of this type was a preacher named Jacob Otto Hoof. Records indicate that George Scott was in close touch with the work in this area and that one woman was reported to have venerated Scott as the Savior returned to earth. In addition Scott wrote to a friend in America that thousands gathered to hear preachers and many were being converted, stolen goods were returned, people became temperate, and he believed a revival was about to spread  THE ILIFF REVIEW 33 over the entire country.14 As in America during the celebrated camp meetings, so in Sweden there were services where people shouted, jumped, rolled, barked like dogs, sang, and jerked. Unfortunately all such phenomenal outbursts were equated with the Lasare movement and as such soundly condemned. This oversimplification led many State Church leaders and pastors to warn their congregations that such preachers and people were filled with the devil and not the Holy Spirit. Again we have something akin to what happened in some of John Wesley's meetings in England with shouting, great weeping, and associated manifestations. Wesley did not encourage these displays of emotion but on the other hand he did not entirely reject them and it seems obvious that Wesley and his preachers set in motion the religious responses of a long slumbering people. The same was true in Sweden. When Scott was at the height of his work, Sweden was embarking upon a much needed spiritual awakening. As in England, so in Sweden, we see during this period the rise of lay preachers who in spite of civil and ecclesiastical opposition gave spiritual nourishment to starving people. They traveled from parish to parish, held meetings either in homes or out of the way places, where they were free from interference. Although there were some pastors and people of rank who participated in this awakening, the majority for the most part were from the common class and this brought ridicule upon the Lasare movement. Some Pietists were strongly influenced by a Lutheran pastor named Henric Shartau who recognized defects in the established church but who at his death in 1825 still frowned upon separation. On the other hand there were Pietists who were influenced by Methodism and with the passing of the years continued to develop a free spirit. Carl Olof Rosenius, 1816 to 1868, was 14 Ibid., pp. 30-31. reared in an area in Sweden where Pietism was strong but the ideas of George Scott were particularly influential in his life. Scott did not advocate a sep-aristic movement in Sweden and so could not be properly called a foe of the State Church. In reality, Scott was a friend of the State Church and attempted to strengthen the ministry of the established church rather than to bring about its destruction. In turn, Rosenius believed that the old church could be reformed from within, thus carrying on the opinion of Scott. Rosenius felt this could best be done through the activity of laymen who could breathe life into a dying body. Thousands stayed in the State Church at this time who under different leadership may have joined the dissenters. At this time devotional literature from America flooded Sweden and Rosenius' preaching and writing reflect these American ideas of freedom which were able to reach the heart and mind of the common man. Among Scott's many enterprises was the fact that he was editor of "Pietisten" and "Missions - Tidningen." Rosenius' attempt to reform the church from within led him on May 7, 1845, to organize the dissenters into the National Evangelical Foundation. One purpose of this organization was to educate and direct itinerant preachers or colporteurs, another was to make wide distribution of Bibles, and devotional literature, and also to guide the work of laymen within the State Church. Actually Rosenius' work and even that of Scott was paving the road for the free church movement in Sweden. Rosenius had labored with Scott in the Bethlehem Chapel in Stockholm and with him breathed a free spirit even though he contended that his ministry was to reform the church of his birth. Rosenius·' successor was Paul Peter Waldenstrom, an ordained minister in the State Church and professor of Greek, Hebrew and Christianity at Gavie College. Through his preaching and writing, Waldenstrom seemed to sum up the differences between the dissenters and the State  34 THE ILIFF REVIEW Church. These included a belief that for doctrine a man must go directly to the Scriptures and not to creeds, and an equal insistence upon a personal subjective commitment to Christ as Savior. The latter eliminated the popular concept of the church as the mediator of salvation. A split was bound to take place and so the Swedish Mission Covenant Church was formed in Sweden in the year 1876. In 1885, what is known today as the Evangelical Covenant Church of America was formed. During this time when Rosenius was leading the dissenter group he found many casting suspicions upon his plans and his leadership. By 1860 he was persecuted as had the Lasare and Scott before him. The pulpit, press, and theater, united in this attack upon him. Stephenson quotes a letter written by Rosenius to Scott in which he tells of how the converted singer, Jenny Lind, refused to appear on the stage and how ashamed she was of the ungodliness of her own people. The letter goes on to inform Scott how she joined the despised Lasare and how the two of them were mutually drawn together by a common faith and experience.15 Unfortunately the name George Scott is not as well known as it should be among those who were participants in the free church movement and among those who now make up the Covenant Church. Scott did not attempt to proselyte for his cause or attempt a schism in the existing church, but he did face frankly the defects and weaknesses of the church. Stephenson writes: Just as Wesley and Whitefield translated the message of the Gospel into language comprehensible to men in the factories and mines of England, so did Scott awaken a new religious life among the humble people in the capital of Sweden, and his influence was soon extended to all parts of Sweden.16 Scott was reaching men and women with a challenging and satisfying message that they did not hear in the es-15 Ibid., pp. 41-42. 19 Ibid., p. 13. tablished church. By permission of the King foreigners were allowed to erect places of worship but a law forbade Swedish citizens from attending these services. Toward the end of the 1830's Scott had become such a popular preacher in Stockholm that the church forbade Scott to preach to Swedish citizens, and yet the crowds continued to come and he complained that he knew of no way to keep them out. Law or no law this continued and Scott realized a larger building was needed to house his audience. In 1837 Scott returned to England and there raised sufficient funds to build what was called the Bethlehem Chapel. In his zeal Scott became more and more bold in his denunciation of the people's sins and the failures of the clergy. As was to be expected there were clergymen who looked for an opportunity to retaliate and to have him removed from the land. Scott was to bring about his own downfall and yet any incident would have been used for this purpose. In the year 1841 Scott visited America to collect funds for his missionary work. To put the message across Scott painted some dark pictures of life in Sweden and when separated from the full text of his message there were remarks that could be used to offend the Swedish people. Scott did offend many and more fuel was added to the fire of opposition that was already burning against him. Upon his return to Sweden he found that his enemies were more vindictive than ever and threats were made against his life and his family. The situation was most unhappy. On Palm Sunday, 1842, a mob assembled at the Haymar-ket and broke up the service while Scott was preaching and it was a miracle that he escaped without being killed. Scott was now alienated from the King and the people. His only choice was to announce discontinuance of services in the chapel and he soon left for England. In a letter dated May 16, 1842, Scott writes to the Committee of the Wesleyan Missionary Society regarding the events leading to the ter- THE ILIFF REVIEW 35 mination of the Stockholm mission. Scott was particularly disturbed by the many papers that at first had supported his work and spoke of maintaining religious liberty in Sweden and then now urged that he return to England and that his work cease. In this letter he also urged: An outrage against a British subject has been committed as appears by the proceedings of March 20th and 21st and the British authorities can at least insist that the rioters be brought to justice.17 At the end of this same letter Scott suggests that if matters are clarified with the Swedish government and people he is more than willing to return to the den of lions. George Scott was an interesting personality about whom more should be known and written. He was a man of zeal. Perhaps his zeal became a bit too intense while he was in America and lacking certain tact he brought about his own downfall which may be attributed to exuberance and thoughtlessness. In reality Scott had a sincere desire to minister to all who had spiritual need and this included the Swedes as well as the English. Upon his ordination in 1830, Scott was prompted to write his spiritual experience up to that date. The implication of his writing is that he did not have a Methodist home background. But early in his youth he did meet Methodists and their beliefs made a strong impact upon him. At first he was leary of class meetings but this apprehension was soon ended. He indicates that he had been in attendance at various class meetings and came to believe they were legitimate and that on July 2, 1827, he was admitted to a love feast and there he entered the enjoyment of God's favor.18 In conclusion a word can be written regarding Methodism in Sweden following Scott's expulsion in 1842. We cannot rightly refer to Scott as the founder of Methodism in Sweden, although it must be conceded that he "f! 17Westin, op. cit., p. 3'52. 18 Ibid., p. 206. prepared the way. Interestingly enough, Swedish Methodism was to be an American product and enterprise. When considering Methodism's foundation in Sweden the name of Olaf Gustaf Hedstrom takes on primary importance. Hedstrom was born in 1803 and as a youth enlisted on the crew of a ship bound for South America. Financial problems cancelled the expedition and he abandoned the ship in New York. Having been trained as a tailor, Hedstrom quickly found work and an American bride. Before long he was converted to Methodism. He became so zealous and enthusiastic with his new found faith that in 1833 he returned to Sweden to share his convictions with his aged parents. His brother, Jonas Hedstrom returned with him to America and he became the founder of Swedish Methodism in the West. Olaf Hed-strom's first pastorate was in New York where he served for ten years. But his most influential ministry was destined to be from 1845 to 1875 when he served as pastor of the Bethel Ship, the John Wesley, which was in New York harbor. This was a floating mission to Scandinavian seamen and came to be a refuge for thousands of immigrants to the new land America. Here Scandinavians found a place of encouragement, evangelism, and information regarding places of possible settlement in the United States. Hedstrom also worked in cooperation with the American Bible Society for the distribution of Bibles. In 1850, one of the Bethel Ship's most famous converts was Sweden's great singer, Jenny Lind. Another convert, Olaf Peterson, went to Norway on a preaching tour, and another convert, John Larsson, was sent officially in 1854 to Sweden as a missionary. Another important name in Swedish Methodism is Victor Witting, who was born at Malmo, March 7, 1825. An adventure seeking lad he became a sailor and thus gained passage to America. His spirit of adventure attracted him to California and the frantic search for gold. This latter venture was without  36 THE ILIFF REVIEW success. Returning to Illinois, greatly disappointed, Witting faced more misfortunes and by the time he returned to New York he was penniless. At this point he came under the influence of Hedstrom and in 1858 Witting entered the Methodist ministry. He became editor of "Sandebudt," a Methodist paper in America, which was first published in Rockford, Illinois, July 18, 1862. On a subsequent trip to Sweden Witting was persuaded by Bishop Calvin King-sley to accept the appointment of superintendent of all Methodist missions in Sweden. From November of 1867 to 1876, Witting served in this capacity. The first step of formal organization took place in Stockholm on January 8, 1868, with fifty-seven persons in the first congregation. By September of 1868 there were seven organized congregations, one hundred and fifteen preaching places, four hundred and twenty-four members, and five Sunday Schools with thirty-four teachers and three hundred and fifty-four children. A paper came out in 1869. In addition to this Methodism published a large number of books and tracts which were put into circulation by colporteurs. But Methodists came to experience the same hostility and opposition given to Scott and the Pietists. Mobs often distrubed their meetings and threatened the lives of their leaders. One preacher, Johannes Nilsson, served a prison sentence of eleven days for defying parish authorities. To add to the dispute a letter was published from George Scott critical of the separation in Sweden caused by American Methodism. Baptists had little to do with Methodists at this time for they were classed with Lutherans because of infant baptism. The year of 1876 saw the first yearly conference organized at Uppsala, Sweden. The nation was divided into districts, each having a presiding elder. Under the law of 1873, Methodist ministers were given permission to perform marriages. In that same year a seminary was established at Orebro and this was eventually moved in 1924 to Gottenburg. The Swedish Methodist Church is under an American Bishop whose seat is in Stockholm. The vital awakening in eighteenth century England under the Wesleys has an interesting relation to the developments in Sweden in the nineteenth century. Several areas of comparison would merit continued and more detailed investigation. One of the most worthwhile of these additional studies would be a comparison of Charles Wesley's hymns and the hymnology that evolved out of Sweden's awakening. This hymnology is best preserved today in the fellowship of the Evangelical Covenant Church of America. BIBLIOGRAPHY A. BOOKS Benson, Adolph, and Hedin, Naboth,cans From Sweden. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1950. Cannon, William R., The Theology of John Wesley. New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury Press, 1946. Carlson, Edgar, The Reinterpretation ofer. Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 1948. Carter, Henry, The Methodist Heritage. New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury Press, 1951. Clark, Elmer T., The Warm Heart of John Wesley. New York: Association of Methodist Historical Societies, 1950. Curnock, Nehemiah, Editor, The Jounrnal of Rev. John Wesley, A. M., Vol. I New York: Eaton & Mains, 1909. Garber, Paul, The Methodists of Continental Europe. New York: Methodist Church, 1949. Hildebrandt, Franz, From Luther to Wesley. London: Lutterworth Press, 1951. Janson, Florence E., The Background of Swedish Immigration 1840-1930. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1931. Joy, James Richard, John Wesley'sing. New York: The Methodist Book Concern, 1937. Lunn, Arnold, John Wesley. New York: The Dial Press, 1937. Nagler, Arthur, Pietism and Methodism. Nashville: Publishing House M. E. Church South, 1918. Nyyal, David and Olsson, Karl, Thelical Covenant Church. Chicago: The Covenant Press, 1954. Rattenbury, J. Ernest, Wesley's Legacy To The World. Nashville: Cokesbury Press, 1929. Stephenson, George M., The Religious Aspects of Swedish Immigration. Minneapolis: The University of Minnesota Press, 1932.  THE ILIFF REVIEW 37 Towlson, Clifford W., Moravian anddist. London: The Epworth Press. 1957. Watson, Philip S., Let God Be God. Philadelphia: Muhlenberg Press, 1949. Wearmouth, Robert F., Methodism and the Common People of the Eighteenth Century. London: The Epworth Press, 1945. Weinlick, John R., Count Zinzendorf. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1956. Westin, Gunnar, George Scott Och Hans Verksamhet I Servige. Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksells, 1928.   Jiartin J^iot and the (Rocky Mountain Conference JietkoMat Jriatorical Society, WALTER J. BOIGEGRAIN THERE was a Methodist Historical Society in Colorado before Dr. Martin Rist belonged to it, but there was much less Methodist history in Colorado until Dr. Rist began to serve on that Society. How does one pay tribute to more than twenty years of service? Obviously, the service itself is a far greater tribute to the man who rendered it than any tribute which will ever be written to him. When the Board of Directors of the Colorado Conference Methodist Historical Society met on December 10, 1937, their minutes record that "Dr. Rist of the Iliff School" attended as a guest. These minutes go on to say that at that same meeting there was presented to the Society, "An interesting souvenir of Father J. L. Dyer consisting of the 'dowser* used by him in prospecting days for locating gold veins and deposits. This was later handed to Dr. Rist to be placed in the archives of the Society for safe keeping." Whether Father Dyer ever found any gold with this dowser is not recorded, but it is certain that the Historical Society found gold in the personality of Dr. Martin Rist, for people have been handing important historical documents to him ever since, and the study of this portion of Methodist History has taken on a new dimension of thoroughness and scholarship. It was not until 1939, that Dr. Rist was officially named Custodian of the Archives of the society, but immediately thereafter he set about the business of safeguarding and enlarging those Archives. In 1940 aproof repository was found for them in the Iliff School of Theology, and for the WALTER J. BOIGEGRAIN is Secretary of the Rocky Mountain Conference Historical Society, Minister of the Westminster Methodist Church, and candidate for the Th.D. degree at the Iliff School of Theology. first time, this material began to be placed in files and catalogued. At this time F. R. Hollenback entrusted to Dr. Rist the only complete set of Colorado Conference Minutes then known to exist. Slowly the materials began to come in. A letter was sent to all of the churches asking them to report what materials they had concerning their own history, and urging them to put these materials in the Archives for safe keeping. Microfilms were made of materials not otherwise available. In 1944 documents concerning the history of the Methodist Church at Rye, Colorado, were received and filed. In 1945, Dr. Rist himself outlined the history of the University Park Church, and in that same year new material concerning the organization of Methodist Sunday Schools in Colorado in 1863 was discovered. It is probable that most of these materials would be permanently lost by this time had it not been for the work of a conscientious Archivist several years ago. About 1945, it began to occur to the Historical Society that a marker ought to be placed at sites of special historical significance to the Methodist Church. The first such marker was placed on the St. James Methodist Church in Central City, Colorado, and dedicated July 13, 1947. The inscription on this marker was prepared by Dr. Martin Rist. "St. James Methodist Church. This church, one of the earlist in Colorado was organized July 10-11, 1859, by two missionaries, Rev. William H. Goode and Rev. Jacob Adriance. Rev. George R. Fisher, a wagon maker and lay preacher was the first resident pastor. For a while, services were held in the home of "Aunt" Clara Brown, a former slave. This building was begun in 1864, during the pastorate of the Rev. Bethuel T. Vincent, editor and publisher 39  40 THE ILIFF REVIEW of the 'Rocky Mountain Sunday School Casket,' the first magazine in Colorado; but it was not completed and dedicated until 1782." The next bronze plaque was placed on the Trinity Methodist Church in Denver. Bishop Glenn Randall Phillips preached the sermon at the service during which this plaque was presented to Trinity, and an article and picture appeared in The Christian Advocale concerning it. Unfortunately vandals have since removed this latter plaque. At the Annual Historical Society Banquet at the Grant Avenue Methodist Church on February 10, 1948, Dr. William Campbell Wasser, who had given long and able leadership, announced to the Historical Society that he was resigning as President. Dr. Martin Rist was elected to replace him. As the work of the Historical Society progressed under the leadership of Dr. Rist, new historical materials began to appear with increasing frequency. In 1949, a diary of Jacob Adriance, one of the first two Methodist ministers in Colorado, was found in the Denver Public Library, and a copy secured and placed in the Archives of the Colorado Annual Conference. When the Iliff School of Theology began to plan for the building which was later to be known as the Ira J. Taylor Library, Dr. Rist saw to it that a room for historical archives would be included in the plan. Today this room is a reality, and is frequently used for research by those wishing to know more of the history of the area. Not only are many original documents preserved here, but also many microfilms of original documents preserved elsewhere are available in the Archives Room of the Taylor Library. In 1952, Dr. Rist's work in the field of Church History achieved even wider recognition when he was elected President of the Western Jurisdictional Historical Society. That year the Historical Society, in Colorado took great pride in seeing Dr. Rist attend the meeting of the National Association of Methodist Historical Societies in Atlantic City. On July 19, 1953, Dr. Rist preached at the Annual Pilgrimage and Homecoming at the St. James Methodist Church in Central City. His historical insights lent an unique flavor to this occasion. In that year also there was presented to the Historical Society through Dr. Rist a license to preach dated December 29, 1860, and issued to a Rev. J. B. Rowen signed by J. M. Chivington, P. E. In addition to this, another item of historical value, Vol. I, No. I of the Rocky Mountain Sunday School Casket dated January, 1864, was presented to the Society. This was published by Dr. B. T. Vincent. One of Martin Rist's pet projects has been the search for materials pertaining to the Methodist Episcopal Church South, as it once existed within the bounds of the Colorado Annual Conference. Much of this search has been successful and as a result there are now copies of the General Minutes of the Methodist Episcopal Church South and some District and Quarterly Conference records of that church available in the Taylor Library. However, the quest for materials continues. In 1957, a History of Methodism in Utah, written by Henry L. Merkel, was placed in the Archives. In this year also it was discovered that a biography of John M. Chivington had been written by his son-in-law. Though the original document could not be obtained, the document was microfilmed and the microfilm placed in the Archives along with other new materials about Chivington which had come to light, such as his Masonic Record and various documents signed by him. In 1958, the Colorado Conference Historical Society changed its name to the Rocky Mountain Conference Methodist Historical Society following the action of the Annual Conference. At the meeting of the Board of Directors of the Historical Society in 1958, the President advised the Directors of the fact that the old Grace Methodist Church, long a land mark in downtown Denver, was to be torn down; but he expressed the hope that one portion of this church building would not  THE ILIFF REVIEW 41 be destroyed. Dr. Rist mentioned that the oldest part of the Grace Church building, the Evans Memorial Chapel, had been built by a great Methodist, Governor John Evans, and that it was probably the oldest extant church building in the city of Denver. The consequences of this are given in detail in Professor Scofield's article in the previous issue of this journal. It was at this same meeting in 1958, that the announcement was made that Dr. Lowell B. Swan had discovered what was apparently a cabin used as a chapel by Father John L. Dyer. Dr. Rist helped Dr. Swan validate this discovery and the chapel building was subsequently moved to Fairplay, Colorado, to become an historical monument, and, with the St. James Church in Central City, a shrine of Methodism in Colorado. But the Colorado Centennial was rapidly approaching, and thus the work of Dr. Rist and the Historical Society increased. Dr. Richard E. West discovered a painting of Father John L. Dyer created by Mr. Herndon Davis, a Denver artist. It was suggested that this painting be purchased by the Historical Society and Mr. Davis should be commissioned to paint pictures of three other Colorado Methodist pioneers, and the four pictures should be hung in the new Methodist Headquarters Building in Denver. Consequently, largely as a result of Dr. Rist's urging, the pictures of John L. Dyer, Jacob Adriance, William H. Goode and Henry Reitze were painted. For a time these pictures hung in the Pioneer Village constructed on the grounds of the Denver Civic Center for the celebration of the Colorado Centennial. There they were viewed by some 300,000 persons. Then they were removed to the Methodist Headquarters Building where they are conspicuously displayed. Recently the pictures of two other pioneer Methodists, Thomas Corwin Iliff, who had much to do with the founding of Methodism in Utah, and D. L. Rader, who performed a similar function in Wyoming, have been added to the original four. To commemorate the Centennial of Methodism in Colorado, the Historical Society authorized Dr. Rist to have copies made of the minutes of the first session of the Rocky Mountain Annual Conference, held in Denver City, Colorado Territory, July 10, 1863. These were made generally available. Dr. Rist also acted as a consultant and source of information for a drama written by Dr. Phillip Kaye and presented to the Annual Conference during the Centennial in 1959. Later he performed the same function for the Pageant. "Land of Promise," written by Dr. Russell Porter of the University of Denver, and presented to the General Conference when it met in Denver in 1960. Also during the Centennial Celebration of Methodism in Colorado, Dr. Rist prepared a History of Methodism in Colorado which he read to the Annual Conference. This was found to be of such value that the Historical Society had it reprinted and a copy given to every delegate to the General Conference in 1960. When that General Conference met in Denver, the first issue of the Daily Christian Advocate carried an article on the beginnings of Methodism in Colorado, written by Dr. Rist. Nor is this all of the writing Dr. Martin Rist has done to call attention to the history of Methodism in this area. At the annual dinner meeting of the Historical Society in 1960, Dr. Walter G. Williams announced that a history of Methodism in the United States was soon to be published by the Abingdon Press. Appreciation was expressed to Dr. Rist for collecting much of the material in this history. But there is a great deal more to be learned about the history of Methodism in the Rocky Mountain Annual Conference. Many valuable materials have yet to be uncovered and much more of the story is still to be written. While this is true, we suspect that Dr. Rist will be searching out the materials and writing the story, and for this we are grateful.   Martin J^iat aa a Veacher J. ALTON TEMPLIN THERE is an old legend which tells a story about St. Louis (Louis IX of France) during the seventh crusade in the middle of the Thirteenth Century. In Egypt Louis is said to have met a Muslim carrying on his head a flask of water, and in one hand a lighted torch. When the crusader asked why the stranger was carrying these he was told: "The water is to pour on the fires of Hell; the torch is to burn up the so-called glories of Heaven. After this the true Muslim will be able to worship God not out of fear of punishment, nor for hope of reward, but for Himself alone." I am not sure the whole story can be allegorized to apply to the task at hand; but many of us are prepared to say that Dr. Martin Rist did lead us into new and more meaningful approaches to many parts of our religious knowledge, and thus he assisted us to lead others to worship God for Himself alone. It is my privilege in the following pages to speak for countless students who studied in Dr. Rist's classes. I shall attempt to analyze his method of teaching, his general classroom attitude, and some of the reasons why we appreciate the work we did under his guidance. This writer first studied under Dr. Rist when in the University of Denver, and it was partly through his influence that I continued my work in Iliff rather than another theological school. During the six years I was associated with Iliff I took most of the courses Dr. Rist offered, and have had opportunity to correspond with him since. Most of the impressions I had of "Martin Rist as a teacher" I could have stated the day Iliff awarded me my degree. However, I would make J. ALTON TEMPLIN is a candidate for the Ph. D. degree in Church History at Harvard. He is currently Minister to Youth at First Congregational Church, Waltham, Massachusetts. the same statements now, though more emphatically, since I have been associated with several other teachers in the same fields in more recent years. In discussion groups in which former Iliff students get together we take some time to recall various experiences we had at Iliff, and our fond memories of Dr. Rist's influence take their rightful place in every such discussion. In my preparation for this present tribute I corresponded with several contemporaries in Iliff and found that we share many of the same attitudes as to the place this one teacher has in our developing academic and ministerial careers. However, what follows is an exposition of why I must consider Dr. Rist an exceptional teacher. I. Details were important. One of the first impressions one received as he began his work in New Testament was that Dr. Rist is a person who emphasized the details underlying his presenation in "Bible through the Ages," "New Testament," and all other courses. As he placed five or six books on one side of the desk, a recent periodical or two on the other side, and his stack of cards with finely written notes immediately before him, we knew that this person had the facts before him, and had mastered the material in the field. Often he would lecture for a whole period without referring to either the books or the notes, for he knew their contents, including New Testament chapter and verse, thoroughly. Many times a question would be asked, and even if it might not be specifically on the subject at hand, Dr. Rist could rapidly thumb through his cards to the specific reference he sought, and would give the gist of the argument, or more often, refer the student to the relevant book and chapter for his own answer. Minute details often seemed to be the most important aspect of his class presentation. But when the student con-43  44 THE ILIFF REVIEW tinued to study in this field he saw through the details to the main point the professor had in mind, and he saw the relevance of the details for the problem at hand. Details such as names, dates, Biblical verses, were never ends in themselves, but rather were the tools with which one embarked on larger questions concerning trends, relationship and basic meanings throughout the warp and woof New Testament thought and history of the developing Church. Dr. Rist knows well that precise scholarship can not be accomplished without the facts as a basis, but he never lets them become stumbling blocks preventing what he rightly considers the more meaningful and result of a particular problem. II. Thorough in study. We immediately were impressed with the fact that Dr. Rist is a thorough scholar and makes heavy demands upon himself. He was more exacting on his own part than he ever was upon any student, but somehow, through his thoroughness he had learned to help students at the point of then-need rather than to overwhelm them with his immense learning. The "original sin" in Dr. Rist's thinking, concerning both his students and himself, is mediocrity. In such an academic atmosphere it was indeed a rare privilege for one of us to locate a fact or an incident with which he was not already familiar. Many of us said often that in his Greek classes we learned as much basic New Testament material as we did Greek, for the instructor was always armed with his Greek-German lexicon as well as the Greek-English dictionary plus several versions of the New Testament. Few sentences were ever translated without our seeing their relation to other possible translations, and their ramifications in their own New Testament Sitz im Leben. We learned not only the grammar and the mere translation of the passages, but in addition we had a feeling of reliving the whole experience with the author in Greek, in German, and ultimately in English. The thoroughness of this teacher is further evidenced in his exegesis in the Interpreter's Bible. He was asked to submit his manuscript several years before it was finally published in 1957, and within the intervening time he wished in vain that the publisher would allow him to make revisions based on continuing research. Who of us cannot remember the many class periods which were begun with further explanation of the question of the previous class? Although at least forty-eight hours had intervened, Dr. Rist would begin where he left off as though he had only paused to take a breath. The answers to such questions were usually fortified with several volumes from the New Testament shelf and an encyclopedia or two. One class in New Testament felt compassion on their instructor and purchased a little red wagon for his use to and from class, but I do not know whether or not the use of this vehicle ever became standard practice. III. Objective rigor a constant watchword. In his scholarship Dr. Rist was rigorous, and never sentimental. Some students who did not know him would often become disturbed because they thought he was not sufficiently committed to and sympathetic with the Christian message. However, most of us never doubted his deep commitment to the religious faith of his church. He was deeply concerned that the Christian message as it was learned through his classes should be relevant and meaningful to the contemporary student wanting to be at home in the contemporary world. He was impatient with pious irrelevancy in New Testament studies as well as in other aspects of the religious faith in which he taught and studied. The contemporary trend in theological studies which insists that purely "objective" scholarship must be superceded by "committed" adherence to a certain predetermined theological formulation would have a difficult time in categorizing Martin Rist. He would of course in- THE ILIFF REVIEW 45 sist that he be placed in the former, and I think rightly so. However, in his approach, to be "objective" does not mean to be "uncommitted" or even "disinterested." He is deeply committed to his faith, but he choses to find his commitment growing out of his objective study, and not in lieu of objectivity. He insisted that we must let the doscuments speak to us, rather than that we must tell them what they are to say. In recent scholarly discussions Dr. Rist has been a staunch defender of this approach in face of a large number who choose the so-called "contemporary" method of* interpretation. Dr. Rist's method of New Testament and early historical analysis is certainly in keeping with one "contemporary" Anglican church historian: The first concern of Christian historical study is not to extract precedents from the Christian past to bind or justify the Christian present, but to understand why the Christian past took the particular form it did. He insisted that we must build the foundation for our academic and ministerial careers for ourselves, rather than merely to adopt what someone before us had already built. For this reason I suggest that he was both objective as to his methodology, and at the same time deeply committed as to his own faith and that which he hoped would be developed by each of his students. For him a new idea is a new challenge for a developing faith, rather than a datum to be pigeonholed in a static system. IV. Students led to use facts-to think. He insisted that his students should not merely accumulate facts, but should learn to use facts. In short, he insisted that they think. He often answered questions which no student was asking, but these were questions which students ought to be asking. While he was never guilty of merely pouring in facts, as in a funnel, he was constantly injecting new ideas to help students begin to think on their own. He had a way of dropping suggestions * Gregory Dix in The Apostolic Ministry, ed. by K. E. Kirk, p. 187. in discussions, and of suggesting topics for our research papers which we had not previously considered. As we worked with these suggestions we sooner or later came to realize that he was giving us the basic blocks with which to build our own foundation in New Testament. Thus we would not erect our academic superstructure on sand and would not be concerned merely with the questions which had been answered by thinkers more skilled than ourselves. V. Scholarship did not always mean agreement. Whether or not a student agreed with Dr. Rist consistently was not one of his criteria in judging scholarship. A student could not be guaranteed a passing mark merely by becoming a "yes" man, nor would he be doomed to failure if took a strongly contradictory approach. To illustrate this I quote a paragraph from a letter received from one of Dr. Rist's former students: A truly fine teacher recognizes scholarship and intellectual ability in those with whom he disagrees. A good teacher is able to give high grades to students whose scholarship and intellectual ability warrant those grades irrespective of their theology. Judged by this standard Dr. Rist is a good teacher, as this example illustrates. In a class on "The Life and Teachings of Jesus" there were two students representing the ends of the theological spectrum. One student maintained an almost complete scepticism with respect to the historical Jesus. The other student held the position which was quite close to Fundamentalism. Each student wrote his final examination paper within his theological position. Each student received an A minus. The mark was not given because of a theological position but because each student had supported his position with logic and scholarship and although Dr. Rist did not agree with either position he realized that both students demonstrated scholarship and intellectual ability. This paragraph was written by James Farrell, one of the students involved. It is a mark only of a mature and truly educated teacher to allow such a divergence, for in the above illustration Dr. Rist agreed with neither extreme. Many teachers, unfortunately, tend more often  46 THE ILIFF REVIEW to equate "schorlarship" with "agreement with my findings." To be sure, those who disagreed with Dr. Rist appreciate this point far more than those who after honest and objective study decided that they must agree with him. VI. Up to date in scholarship. As a teacher, Dr. Rist has kept himself on the forefront of contemporary knowledge. He has long emphasized what is now much better known, that the book of Revelation was written with martyrs specifically in mind, and that the Pastoral Epistles reflect a much later Church government than that of Paul's generation. In these two instances and in many others, he has been among the leaders in introducing new ideas and concepts to his students. Most recently he has introduced a course at Iliff on the "Gospel of Thomas." This little-known book, as well as the rest of the 1946 find at Nag-Hammadi in upper Egypt, has been very slow ining its place into American scholarship, overshadowed as these works have been by the Dead Sea Scrolls. However, almost as soon as this Gospel of Thomas was translated from the Coptic Dr. Rist developed an interest in it, and his course in this significant book is one of the very few offered today in this country. As the rest of the books in this collection find their way into a modern language, we may be assured that their significance will be expounded in Dr. Rist's classroom. It is indeed valuable for the contemporary ministerial student to know that his teacher is well-versed not only in the traditional studies of New Testament, but is equally cognizant of the publications of the current season. VII. A scholar among scholars. It is not only the student who respects him as a teacher, for he has made his reputation among other professors in the field of New Testament. Not long ago this writer was talking with a professor of New Testament who has never met Dr Rist, but who was interested to know that I had studied with him. This person was especially grateful for Dr. Rist's scholarship with respect to the Revelation material in the Interpreter's Bible, used in many college and seminary classrooms. I talked with Dr. Morton Scott Enslin several years ago when he was lecturing at Iliff in the summer school. We were discussing the points especially at which Dr. Rist and he disagreed, but Dr. Enslin assured us that among many teachers of New Testament that he knew, the name of Martin Rist cannot but command respect. Surely this is borne out by the fact that Dr. Rist has been invited to teach on many summer school faculties across the country. His ability as a teacher and scholar was recognized especially in that he was chosen to write the already-mentioned Interpreter's Bible exegesis of Revelation. It is noteworthy that Dr. Rist was given his choice of two commentaries. We are certainly glad that he chose Revelation, but we only hope that soon we will have the information available which he might have included in the other commentary. VIII. Sincere interest in students as persons. In spite of all that has been stated above, it may well be that a teacher's real influence is only in the proportion that he is vitally interested in his students as individuals and as future ministers of the church. Who of us has not known Martin Rist as a counsellor on problems related to school work, church activities, or personal problems? Many times and on many occasions he has visited us in our apartments in the vicinity of Iliff as well as in our churches, and we have always felt encouraged to speak with him in his office or in the Iliff halls. On one occasion Dr. Rist went to a student's church in Eastern Colorado for a meeting. On the way back to Denver he was caught in a wind storm and the blowing sand ruined the finish on one side of his car. After the arrangements were made to have the car repainted he was telling some of us of the whole experience, and included many humorous comments. Even such an experience as the sand storm had not dampened the  THE ILIFF REVIEW 47 enthusiasm he had about his trip, for we knew that in spite of the inconvenience, Dr. Rist was thankful if the trip had been appreciated and had been a help to the student minister and the congregation of the small church. Sometimes in class discussion a student would ask a question irrelevant to the discussion at hand. Other questions would be posed which only revealed that the student had not bothered to read the basic assignments. In either case the professor would honor the question and the student with a good and well-thought-out answer and would never attempt to be curt or embarrass the student. No matter whether our grades were high or low, we knew that our professor of New Testament was interested in us as individuals, and not merely as some statistics in his grade book. IX. At home in this geographical area. Dr. Rist has been interested not only in his subject and his students, but also in the geographical area in which he works. He came to Iliff from another part of the country, but very quickly began to study the local history and traditions of the area. He has since written and taught in various aspects of local history, has directed many dissertations on the early Church History of Colorado, and has written a history of his own church, University Park. Many of us have been encouraged to look up the historical details of the student churches in which we worked. This was not only for the good of the Methodist Historical Society, but also because our instructor knew we could be more effective ministers if we were conversant with the background of our own community. Dr. Rist has practiced what he preached, and has instilled in many of his students the same concern for local church history which he has shown throughout these many years in Colorado. I remember many profitable informal hours spent listening to him tell of some of the results of his study as he told us of the history of the Iliff School, the Iliff family, Bishop Warren, John Merritt, John Collins, or the beginnings of Methodism in the area back to Jacob Adriance and Father Dyer, the "snow-shoe itinerant." Those of us who were in Dr. Rist's classes during the time he was engaged in planning the new library were con-constantly amazed at the thoroughness with which he embarked on that task. He was vitally concerned that the building should be as functional as possible, because he was interested not only for the sake of the school, but more important, for the students of the coming generations who would make the library the center of their work. X. A teacher beyond the school room. As a teacher, Dr. Rist has maintained his concern in education beyond the walls of his theological school room. He has always been willing and anxious to go to student conferences, ministerial meetings, or other adult groups to bring the insight of modern scholarship to students not planning theological careers, ministers away from school, and to laymen in many churches. He has written not only specialized scholarly articles, but is a frequent contributor to the Church School materials of his own denomination. Certainly in the Revelation commentary, and in the more recent publications on the same biblical book he is a teacher even beyond the halls of Iliff, for I have found his work useful not only in the classroom but also with adult education scholarship this most enigmatic of all books need remain a mystery no longer, neither for students nor for the average layman. XI. Interdenominational conversations. His interest has not been confined to one denomination, for he has maintained conversations with several other groups. It was because of Dr. Rist's interest in the contemporary Jewish faith that I attended my first synagog service in Denver. One of the courses he taught at the University of Denver, popular for Methodist and other students as well, was "American Types of Religion," a survey of many religious groups in con- 48 THE ILIFF REVIEW temporary America. We have often heard him relate conversations he has had with Roman Catholics of the area. Many of the significant questions he put to them were appreciated by them; some other searching questions were not so readily appreciated. At many points he has proved himself as much at home in the Catholic Encyclopedia as Roman Catholic scholars themselves. Likewise he has maintained an interest in the Morman Church and often takes a side trip to visit the temple grounds when in Salt Lake City. On one trip he joined the group of tourists following the guide to hear the story of the early pioneers. He was especially interested in the story of the salvation God brought to the early Mormon settlers when He sent the sea gulls to devour the crickets, and thus to save the Mormons from imminent starvation. On one occasion, showing his deep interest in all phases of the story, Dr. Rist's question to the guide was "If God sent the sea gulls, who sent the crickets?" The answer, so far as I know, has not been recored for posterity. XII. The Personality of the man. But uniting all the above there is one thing more, the personality of the man, which cannot be adequately set in type. Behind his reserved wry smile we knew was a man both exacting in scholarship, and humanly approachable in our everyday needs; a man vitally interested in furthering thought and research in his chosen field, but likewise sincerely interested in the beginning stumbling student. What he stood for we all knew: he insisted on truth and knowledge, whether orthodox or not; he encouraged us to be creative religious thinkers standing unashamed among the other academic disciplines of our day; and he taught us how to be meaningful leaders in the congregations we then served, or tasks we would one day assume. Many of us still think of him as "Mr. New Testament." XIII. Mrs. Rist ideal helpmate. Lastly, but certainly a most important part of any statement concerning Dr. Rist as a teacher is Mrs. Rist. Most of us sooner or later came to know her through her various contacts with student groups, or in the hospitality of their home. In classes or in social hours, many of us have spent many enjoyable hours in the Rist home. Mrs. Rist is always a gracious hostess, and always interested in the students in her husband's classes. Usually she would join in our discussions around the table heavily laden with refreshments. Often in the midst of a tale her husband was telling, apocryphal or otherwise, we would hear her typical words "now, Martin!" to bring us all back to the discussion at hand. I remember especially the evening when we were gathered in their living room in fear and trembling. It was the time for a final exam in Greek. However, at the hour set for beginning the ex-axamination, after tables were set up before us that we might write in comfort, Mrs. Rist proceeded to place on each table a game of "cootie." From then on we had a very enjoyable evening. Afterwards we wondered why such an activity was appropriate for an academic class, but then we knew the answer. Why should we go through the formality of an examination when our instructor was well aware of what we knew already? In this and many other situations we knew that Mrs. Rist was involved in the background planning, and was a constant helpmate for her scholar-husband, and an added inspiration for the average struggling theological student. If we may borrow the same medieval story once again, we may apply it to Dr. Rist. Indeed, he carries as it were, a flask of water which he used to wash from our thinking the half-truths with which we came to seminary; he then brought us the torch symbolizing an enthusiasm for wider learning which was at our very fingertips; but always his concern was that we too should learn to serve God wholeheartedly in our churches and in our lives.  (Bibliography ie Worka by Martin J\iot (Arranged Chronologically) Compiled by Emery Percell "Is Mark a complete Gospel?" Anglican Theological Review, Spring, 193*2. "Is Matthew 11:25-30 a primitive baptismal Hymn?" Journal of Religion, vol. 15, January, 1935. "Two Isiac Mystics : Plutarch the Theologian and Apuleius the Priest," Chicago: Private edition, distributed by the University of Chicago Libraries, 1936. "Visionary Phenomena and primitive Christian Baptism," Journal of Religion, vol. 17, July, 1937. "God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; a liturgical and magical Formula," Journal of Biblical Literature, vol. 57, no. 3, 1938. "Additional Parallels to the Rending of the Veil in Melito's Homily on the Passion," Harvard Theological Review, vol. 31, July, 1938. "Pseudepigraphic Refutations of Marcionism," Journal of Religion, vol. 22, January, 1942. "The Apocalyptic Pattern," Iliff Review, vol. 1, no. 1, Winter, 1944. " 'Love' as an ecclesiastical Term in I Clement," Religion in the Making, vol. 1, no. 3, March, 1942. "The Blessings of the Unrighteous," Iliffview, vol. 1, no. 2, Spring, 1944. "Our Knowledge of Jesus," An Encyclopedia of Religion (edited by Vergilius iFerm), New York: Philosophical Library, 1945. "Protestantism and the Primitive Church," Protestantism, a Symposium (edited by William K. Anderson), Nashville: Partheon Press, 1945. "What is Formgeschichte ?" Iliff Review, vol. 2, no. 1, Winter 1945. "Revelation: a Handbook for Martyrs," Iliff Review, vol. 2, no. 3, Fall, 1945. "Harry Thedore Morris: 1899-1946," Iliff Review, vol. 3, no. 2, Spring, 1946. "How shall we deal with the Miracles of the Gospels?" Iliff Review, vol. 3, no. 3', Fall, 1946. "Daniel and Revelation," Adult Student, July-August, 1947. "History of Religion in Colorado," Colorado and its People (edited by LeRoy R. Hafen), New York: Lewis Historical Publishing Co., 1948. "The Metamorphosis of Apuleius and the Zoolatry of the Egyptian Mysteries," Iliff Review, vol. 3, no. 3, Fall, 1948. EMERY PERCELL is a third year student at the Iliff School of Theology and Dr. Rist's student assistant in the New Testament Department. He has been elected Elizabeth Iliff Warren Fellow for the coming academic year and will coninue his studies at the University of Chicago. "The Life of Jesus," Adult Teacher, March, 1949. "Varieties of historical Interpretation," Iliff Review, vol. 7, no. 3, Fall, 1950. "The Assumption of Mary," Iliff Review, vol. 8, no. 3, Fall, 1951. "Should the Revised Standard Version of the New Testament be revised?" Iliff Review, vol. 9, no. 3, Fall, 1952. "Lindsay B. Lolngacre-a true Liberia!," Iliff Review, vol. 10, no. 2, Spring, 1953. "The modern Spirit," Iliff Review, vol. 10, no. 2, Spring, 1953. "Denomination Beginnings in Colorado 1859-60," The Central City Tommy-Knawker, Setember 4, 1953'. "The common Source of Revelation 16:17-22:5 and the Apocalypse of Elijah," Iliff Review, vol. 12, no. 1, Winter, 1955. "Old Testamet Heroes of Jewish Legend in the New Testament," Iliff Review, vol. 13, no. 1, Winter, 1956. "Foundations of Faith," Adult Student, July, 1956. "The Iliff Theological School Library," Library Journal, vol. 81, December 1, 1956. "Introduction and Exegesis to the Book of Revelation," The Interpreter's Bible, vol. 12 (edited by George Buttrick), New York: Abingdon Press, 1957. "A Communion Service," Iliff Review, vol. 14, no. 1, Winter, 1957. "Human Destiny and Man's Relation to Jesus Christ," Adult Student, March, 1957. "Modern Manuscript Discoveries and the New Testament," Iliff Review, vol. 15, no. 2, Spring, 1958. "Some Aspects of New Testament Christ-ology," Religion in Life, vol. 27, no. 4, Autumn, 1958. "In the Direction of Canterbury?" Motive, March, 1959. "The Gospel of Matthew," Christian Action, vol. 14, nos. 4 and 5, April, May, June, 1959. "The Use of the Old Testament by the Author of Revelation," Iliff Review, vol. 17, no. 2, Spring, 1960. "How can we bear the Cross ?" Adult Student, April, 1960. "The Apocrypha," Adult Bible Course, vol. 7, no. 1, January-March, 1961 The Modern Reader's Guide to the Book of Revelation, New York: Association Press (Reflection Books), 1961. ADDITIONAL WRITINGS Professor Rist has written a large number of book reviews, which have been published in many different journals and church public-49  50 THE ILIFF REVIEW ations, and doubtless a number of additional articles, which we have not been able to locate for this bibliography. Two unpublished manuscripts should be added to the list: The Influence of Buddhism upon theings of Jesus, Th. D. Dissertation, Denver: Iliff School of Theology Library, 1929. Two Isiac Mystics'. Plutarch and Apuleius, Ph.D. Dissertation, Chicago: University of Chicago Library, 1936. (Editor's note: In a subsequent issue of this journal we shall provide a supplement to this bibliography, if additional writings of Professor Rist are called to our attention.) 
