IN MEMORIAM: H. GORDON VAN SICKLE JAMESON JONES The sudden death of Harold Gordon Van Sickle on March 17, 1975 took from the faculty of The Iliff School of Theology one of its senior and distinguished members. At the time of his death, Mr. Van Sickle was Professor of Christian History and Missions. He had joined the Iliff faculty on September 1, 1952. From 1958 to 1972 he served as Registrar of the School and from 1956 to 1969 as Business Manager of The Iliff Review. As a scholar and teacher, Professor Van Sickle was competent in both Church History and Missions. Tributes to him have emphasized his great skill as a teacher, his wide range of knowledge, the depth of his scholarship, and also the warmth of his personal relationship with students and with colleagues. Professor Van Sickle was born in Pondcreek, Oklahoma, on September 26, 1910. He married Iva Loretta Henley on June 8, 1937. They had two daughters, Iras Loretta (now Iras Crymble of Carbon-dale, Colorado) and Janet Adrienne (now Janet Kalinski of Boulder, Colorado). Professor Van Sickle was graduated from Lon Morris Junior College in 1930, from Southwestern University of Texas (Bachelor of Arts, 1937), and from the Yale University Divinity School (Bachelor of Divinity, 1940). He studied also in the graduate school of Yale University and the graduate school of the University of Texas. An ordained minister of The Methodist Church, he served as pastor in Manor, Texas and was a chaplain in the United States Naval Reserve, Pacific Theater, 1945-46. He taught history, beginning in 1942 at Tulane University, the University of Texas, and the University of Denver. He became a member of the faculty of The Iliff School of Theology in 1952. He was a member of the Southwest Texas Conference of the United Methodist Church. He taught at numerous pastorate schools, schools of missions, and spoke on college campuses at religious emphases weeks. He traveled extensively, and in 1960-61 held a faculty fellowship of the Association of Theological Schools for study and travel in Latin America. He was secretary-treasurer of the Crestview Community Association, 1954-57, member of the Littleton, Colorado, Community Council, 1956-58, a member of the Arapahoe County Human Relations Council. He was also a member of several professional societies and organizations, including the American Society of Church History, the Ameri-JAMESON JONES is President of The Iliff School of Theology. 5  can Association of University Professors, Professors of Missions Association, the World Methodist Historical Society, the United Methodist Historical Society, the Rocky Mountain Conference Historical Society, and he was a charter member of the Society of Missiology. He contributed to major religious journals and periodicals. He planned to retire from active service on December 31, 1975. Tragically, he suffered a sudden stroke on March 10 and died as a result one week later. Memorial Services were held at First United Methodist Church of Littleton, Colorado, on March 20, conducted by the President of Iliff, Dr. Jameson Jones, with memorai tributes by the Reverend Russel Rehm, Professor Van Sickle's student assistant, and Professor Harvey H. Potthoff. Before his death, Professor Van Sickle had requested that any memorial contributions be made to The Iliff School of Theology to provide scholarships for the students. The Harold Gordon Van Sickle Memorial Scholarship Fund has been established and will be continued in his memory. Dr. Potthoff spoke of Professor Van Sickle as a Christian scholar who found joy and fulfillment in his calling, and as "a great human being - large in outlook, warm, resilient in spirit, with a wonderful sense of humor that brightened many a committee and faculty meeting. He was a great teacher." Professor Van Sickle will be greatly missed by those who continue at The Iliff School of Theology. The value of his scholarship, his teaching, and the meaning of his personal relationships will be permanently enshrined in the lives and ministries of all those who were touched by his life. 6 
