A THEOLOGY FROM MINISTRY SALLY LENTZ PALMER PREFACE: THE STRUGGLE TO BELIEVE A. The Problem with Mere Humanism-Insignificance A man said to the universe "Sir, I exist" "However," replied the universe, "That fact has not created in me A sense of obligation." -Stephen Crane B. Recognizing that Doubt is Part of Faith. O God, give us eyes to see thee, ears to hear thy voice, and faith to touch thy love. When the world tears us into little pieces, help us seek thee to make our lives whole. Help us, Lord, to accept our doubt as part of faith. Help us understand that if faith were easy you would not ask it of us. O Lord, help us believe and forgive our unbelief. Amen. C. Accepting Mystery as Part of Faith. Almighty God, Help me to accept half your story Let me bask in the warm rays of the sun, without wanting to scan its scorching light; SALLY LENTZ PALMER is a third year student in the Master of Divinity Pro-gram at The Iliff School of Theology and Pastor of Pilgrim Congregational Church (United Church of Christ) in Denver. This paper was presented in an Advanced Colloquium Group. 29  let me find joy in the tasks of this earth, without wanting to probe the far side of the tomb; let me take a breath without knowing where it comes from or where it goes. Most merciful God, Help me feel close to you in spite of your secrets. Lord, Let my finite mind rest easy with your Infinity. Amen. AFFIRMATIONS OF FAITH I. God the Creator A. God as Omnipotent - as the Maker of all Things Almighty God, I stand before you in awe. I behold your shadow- which stretches from the smallest spider to the farthest moon. I see your grace in the granite furrows of a mountain, in the dark secrets of a marsh, in the open wisdom of a smile, in the bitter voice of dust. Almighty God, who stirs the smallest atom and the largest star, stir my soul. Amen. B. God as Immanent - as Active in this World O Lord, Help me find thee in the jostlings of this world: in plants which welcome the wind, in stones which cling to the ground, in creatures which buzz, and crawl, and glide. 30  So often, Lord, I only look for thee in unworldly places, in awesome thoughts which hang from the stars, in brilliant flashes which radiate from the sun, in frozen moments which hide behind the clouds. Dear Creator, Help me know that you are the Infinite and the Finite, the Changeless and part of the changing In the vastness of your Universe help me feel akin to thee. Amen. C. God as Personal - as Active in my Life Thank you, Lord, for my life. My mother caressed me in her womb. My father gave his seed. But they could not make life. It was you, Lord, who pushed me from oblivion to sound and sense and sight. Thank you, Lord, for my life. I know I am the child of my mother and my father. By why did you call me here? why was I born in this land? why was I born at this time? and, why am I my parents' child? It was you, Lord, who gave me this earthly home. Thank you Lord, for my life. My mother fed me. My father heard my cries. They loved me but they could not make me grow. It was You, Lord, Who turned my food to flesh, Who stretched me out, Who helped me heal, Who gave me rest. Thank you, Lord, for my life. I am the child of my parents, But they could never have imagined me- my laughter, my sorrow reach beyond their wishes, my needs, my talents far exceed their care, my loves, my fears fly beyond their grasp. Their love made a child But only You could imagine me. 31  Thank you, Lord, for the gift of life. For being more than mother and father to me. Amen. II. God the Redeemer - Jesus Christ Almighty God, Help us understand One Man's death; Jesus chose to die, He chose to follow your will, He chose to prove the triviality of our fear. Almighty God, Help us understand How one single Person Took all our sins And died with them So that we might live. Amen. B. God who Saves us Savior of mercy and power, We continually make mistakes- because we are human, and selfish, and forgetful of God. But you, Jesus Christ, can free us- from sin, from guilt, from our worst selves. Enter our hearts Fill us with grace Help us learn to forgive. In thy Name, we pray. Amen. III. God the Enabler - The Holy Spurt Almighty Spirit of God, who catches the wind, who turns the earth, who brings us the comfort of Christ, descend upon us now. Help us know you, with our minds and our hearts. 32  Forgive our blindness which expects to see you only in the spectacular. Forgive our impatience which asks you to come only when we are ready. Forgive us, Lord, and help us draw your Presence with each breath. Amen. IV. Doctrine of Persons I am my brother's keeper-that is my agony, that is my joy. Dear Lord, who cares for us all, Help us be our neighbor's keeper. Help us to understand, to feel respect, to bear our mutual weakness. Help us live together, as people who share this earth Help us to rejoice in our differences, to understand what we ask of each other, to say a gentle "I'm sorry." O God, As you cared for us Teach us to care for each other. Amen. V. Doctrine of Sin Sin is separation from God. Lord, There's something in me that has to break-it holds fast to each moment; it claims a right "to use my time as I please"; it hurries and grows impatient. Lord, There's something in me that has to break-it shouts "This life belongs to me; It may be all I have, but, at least, it's mine." it proclaims "Each day, each year ( and especially each vacation ) Is part of my Domain." 33  Lord, There's something in me that has to break-So I can come And flow with Thee. Amen. VI. Doctrine of Evil Evil exists in this world; its effect is human misery. Sin is misery that is within our control. Evil is misery outside our control. As Lord's Prayer says: "Lead us not into temptation But deliver us from evil.9* O Lord, So much of what ravages this planet stretches beyond our individual hands, We feel its darkness, We fear its power. Open our eyes to your kingdom So the mistakes of this world no longer hold sway. Amen. VII. Doctrine of the Church The Church is we we who proclaim Jesus is Lord we who show mercy in the Name of Christ. Lord, Help us know that love is, what we can do with other people. Help us to respond to care to seek out to listen. So often, we're trapped by our own possessions; Help us to make them less important than the people we love. So often, we're caught by our own images; Help us know that loving is not making someone a carbon copy of our dreams. 34  O Lord, Help us be content with ourselves So we can reach out gladly And love others for what they are. Amen. VIII. Doctrine of Self Each self has free will which carries with it both opportunity and responsibility. Free will refers to our attitudes as well as our actions. A. Free will in actions O Lord, Save me from myself. Amen. B. Free will in attitudes O Lord, The world turns through Thy love. Help me turn with it. When I see something lovely, I want it to linger. When I care for others, I want to possess them. When I understand something, I want it to be true-forever. If I had my will, I would hold onto this huge earth and keep it just the same. O Lord, Help me relinquish-gladly. The world turns through thy Love Help me turn with it. Amen. IX. Doctrine of Ministry Ministry is radical love- "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart with all thy soul with all thy mind and with all thy strength. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 35  Almighty God, Who is both Mother and Father to us all, Help us serve you first and serve other people in your Name. Comfort us, but also Confront us with the responsibility to be the men and women you would have us be. Help us make your word of love become flesh in our action. Through Jesus Christ, we pray. Amen. X. Doctrine of Salvation We are saved, not by merit, but by grace. God's grace exists for us and for the world. We can choose whether or not to accept grace in our lives. When we choose God's grace, we are saved. When we forget the grace of God, we become miserable. Our merit, then, comes in seeking the grace of God. .... Our merit comes in joyfully proclaiming: "Thine Is the kingdom And the power And the glory, for ever and ever. Amen." 36 
