IN MEMORIAM: JAMESON JONES The school community was deeply saddened by the death of Smith Jameson Jones, Jr. July 18, 1982. He was President of The Iliff School of Theology from September 10, 1969 until February 10, 1981, when he became Dean of the Divinity School of Duke University. Dr. Jones' leadership was vigorous and forward-looking, marked by a high level of efficiency and effectiveness. His ability to recall detailed information was amazing, ranging from data of institutional management and educational program to individual facts in the lives of students and associates, from obscure items in the history of the school to airline schedules. During this period the school experienced steady growth in quantity and quality. All who love the school are deeply grateful for his outstanding leadership and enduring contributions. Throughout this same period Dr. Jones made comparable contributions to the life of the church, serving as Secretary of the Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada, Secretary and then President of the Association of United Methodist Theological Schools. In the United Methodist Church he was Vice President and then President of the University Senate, on the Committee of Diaconal Ministry, and on the Rocky Mountain Conference Council on Ministries. He served as a Delegate to the General Conference in 1968,1970,1976 and 1980, and was a Reserve Delegate in 1972* This service was but a continuation of a previous record of outstanding leadership at local, regional and national levels in the church. However, the most profound impression on those of us who were privileged to work with him was the personal dimension which permeated everything he did. There was a very genuine caring for persons. He knew the students well and he spent many hours with them individually as well as in groups. All of us-members of the Faculty, Board of Trustees, and Staff-were counted as personal friends. His generosity of time and energy was unstinting. His helpfulness was eminently practical and at the same time conveyed a spirit that transcended his official position. Jamie embodied an I-thou relationship with others which was the focal point of our very real sense of community-"a beloved community of memory and hope"-of sharing and caring. Although we celebrated his brilliant career and our good wishes attended him, there was a sense of severe loss when he and Bonnie moved to Duke University. At that time he wrote in his message to the school: My love for Iliff, and my appreciation of and respect for all its people-including you who comprise a great student body-are diminished in no way by this decision. I will continue to care about 3  you and to anticipate great things for you and from you, wherever our ministries take us and whoever our successors might be at Iliff. So it has been. Our sense of loss exceeds our ability to express. Our gratitude will be undying. Our trust is in God-the God he served so faithfully-source of grace and love. "For now abideth faith, hope and love, these three; and the greatest of these is love." -The Editor 4 
